Spain and the independence of the United States: 'In the trenches of the Empire Gálvez, Saavedra, Ezpeleta.'


Good afternoon. I see that my secretary has given me the text of
yesterday's conference with
I will have to improvise.
In the trenches of the Empire, Gálvez, Saavedra and Espereta,
that is today's topic and allow me to welcome you most warmly and to
express the satisfaction
because on a day when Madrid is playing and Torrea Morante, I think,
today or I don't know if it is today or
tomorrow you will be here in such large numbers. Thank you very much
indeed. This is what motivates one.
First of all , I would like to welcome the presence today of the director
of the Academy of History,
Carmen Iglesias, who has been the architect of this cycle, and who is a
dear friend of this
foundation, as we all here admire and love. I would also like to pay
tribute to
the participants of this cycle, Luis Ribó, Hugo Dorn and Duque Estrada.
And today a tribute
special to my colleague and friend Gonzalo Quintero, from the Chamber, a
little later.
First of all , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the Royal
Academy of History,
for the organization of a cycle on an interesting, profound, sometimes
not very well known topic and
of great actuality. The history of the Spanish Empire is a never-ending
breeding ground of
news, discoveries, adventures, epics and feats of boundless courage.
You have to have been to the Americas to try to imagine and perceive
the immensity and unity of
the deed. And it is true that if you have not been to America, you do
not know Spain well, as someone said.
very famous he said. I also believe that in this debate, the
participation of the Royal Academy of History
Spanish represents a guarantee of veracity and equanimity in historical
episodes, which there are
admittedly, in some stages they have been controversial. This cycle has
contributed to
I believe that Spain's role in the independence of the United States can be
exalted, and thus, in my opinion, it can
We all know the magnitude of the Spanish contribution to this process
of independence.
I feel very responsible for having invited Gonzalo Quintero Sarabia to
this cycle,
and I have done so not because we are colleagues, but because we are
close friends and survivors of many
joint fatigues throughout our diplomatic trajectory. Loyal friend,
always insubordinate,
but in the end always obedient. But even more than his great
diplomatic itinerary,
I believe that it is necessary to highlight the facets in his
curriculum vite that deeply mark his
biography. First his vocation as a historian slash writer and his
inexhaustible knowledge of diving
in archives, libraries and thus discover new trends or new historical
data. Belongs to
to that generation of writers, historians, and diplomats who have
contributed so much to history
of Spain and the history of international relations. The diplomatic
function invites especially to study in depth the history of countries and peoples in
order to better understand the history of the
its engravings, its values and its national characteristics. And
secondly, its vocation
Latin Americanist, demonstrated from the outset in the choice of his
spouse,
who I am not sure where she is, but whom I greet with all my affection,
Colombian by birth and a brilliant historian. In his career, Gonzalo
has been stationed at
Bogotá, in Lima, Washington and New York, among others, and in all of
his destinations he has
close ties with the academies of history and leading universities in
these countries.
Gonzalo Quintero is also a corresponding member of the General Academy
of History.
But the quality of history he produces is most apparent in his works,
of obligatory and exciting reading. The bibliographies of Blas de Lezo
and Bernardo de Galvez help us
to value and admire the deeds of these admirable characters. Today he
is going to speak to us
of Galvez, Saavedra and Espereta, who, as he rightly says, distinguished
themselves in the trenches of the
empire. Because let us not deceive ourselves, it is in the trenches that
empires are forged and
Gonzalo's books where you can understand what these empires
represented. He said to them,
enjoy this chronicle, which, as the classic said, is the incestuous
daughter of history.
and literature. Thank you very much.
Gonzalo, as you would say in the United Sciences, the floor is
yours. Good afternoon. Thank you very much, Raymundo,
for this completely undeserved introduction. Thank you for the
presence of the members of the
Royal Academy of History. Dear Carmen, dear director, thank you very
much for making me
the honor of being present here today. I began my relationship with the
Academy of History when
worked on the bibliography of Pablo Morillo, the Nemesis of Simón
Bolívar, whose archives were
preserved in the library of the Royal Academy of History. And there he
established an endearing
friendship with Quintina Aldea, then librarian, whom I will always
miss very much.
I would like to thank the Ramón Areces Foundation, not only Ambassador
Raymundo Pérez Hernández, who was my
head of the Foreign Ministry for three very eventful years. Ambassador
Perez Hernandez was the head of what is known in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs as the
ambassador introducer, who is the chief of protocol of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs,
responsible for the visits of foreign heads of state to Spain and for the
visits of foreign heads of state to Spain.
our heads of state, i.e., their majesty, the kings abroad.
But the full title
in the eighteenth century of the Ambassador Introducer was Ambassador
Introducer and Senior Spy for the
Kingdom. And as a spy he keeps very complete information on all of us
here, so be very careful what you do. The story, as Isaac Newton said
concerning the
science, is built on the shoulders of giants. And I have had the
privilege, during the 20 years that
I have been working on this topic, of Spain's role in the American
Revolution, of perched on the shoulders of
of some very special giants. One of them, one of them present today who
gave the conference
Carmen Iglesias, the inaugural speaker of this cycle, spoke about the
political and international context
of Spain's role in the American Revolution. Luis Ribot spoke about the
political issues
Hugo Odón, Estrada's dupe, spoke about military issues. These three
conferences provide us with the hanger from which we are going to hang
today the characters that performed in
that moment. Because to understand the interaction between the
characters and their historical context,
what they could do and how the historical forces focused on them, I think
it is good to take
and go to accompany the men who lived at that moment and who, from the
trenches
built as Rubén C. Raimundo Pérez Hernández built the empire. The
conquest of
Pensacola in 1781 and the subsequent victory of Spain in this war was
only possible because there
a number of people who trusted each other, who quarreled with each
o t h e r , but who
all ended up pushing in the same direction, which was to achieve
victory for the Spanish arms.
Today we are going to talk, the title of the conference says they are
Galvez, Espeleta, Saavedra and points
suspensory points. My intention is to talk about as many suspensory
points as possible, ie,
all those who made a fundamental contribution to this campaign.
I apologize to those specialists who miss one, two, three, four people,
I do not know if they are missing one, two, three or four people.
time to include all the people who have contributed or who have made a
contribution
important, but anyway I will try to do it as much as possible.
Saavedra, Espeleta, Galvez met together with Esteban Rodriguez Miro in
what was a
military training academy. Their biography begins in 1742 with the
birth of Joseph
of Espeleta in Navarra, in 44 Esteban Miró was born in Catalonia, we do
not know exactly where,
and in 46 Galvez and Saavedra. They entered the army at the age of 14
and the others entered at the age of 16, except for
Saavedra who enters later. Galvez's entry is different from the others.
Galvez was from a family of peasants, not even very poor peasant farmers, from a village
in Malaga, whose name is hardly pronounceable, Macharabiaya, in the Serranía de Málaga,
absolutely poor.
The fortune of the Galvez family begins because José, Bernardo's uncle,
is a brilliant student.
and ends up developing a brilliant career in the court. And Bernardo de
Galvez enters in the French army because in the Seven Years' War between France and Spain
against Great Britain,
and not in the Spanish one, because José de Galvez was in touch with the
French because it was
the lawyer of the French embassy in Madrid and had no money to pay a
commission at the French Embassy in Madrid.
Spanish army. This help from Jose de Galvez to his nephew Bernardo de
Galvez is a constant feature of the
Is this nepotism? It is not nepotism because the word
nepotism did not enter the dictionary of the Royal Academy until 1843,
and when in 1843 the
The word nepotism defines it as a voice that denotes the inordinate
preference that some people give to their
relatives for public graces or engagements. The key word is
unconscionable, if not unconscionable.
is not nepotism. While Saavedra was thinking about whether he was going
to be a priest or a military man, the others
were developing their military careers. Saavedra joined the army at the
age of 22, the others had entered 14 Espeleta and 16 Esteban Rodríguez Miró. In
1669 to 72 Bernardo
Galvez is destined for what is today northern Mexico and the southern
United States and develops
a campaign against the Apache that alone would merit a conference like
this one, an idea
for Don Raymundo. They are in 1774 they have the grades that you see
there, sergeant major Espeleta that is to say.
what would be today's Lieutenant Saavedra evidently entered later in
the army is therefore one grade behind and captains Rodriguez Miro and
Bernardo de Galvez.
They enter and are selected for the royal military school of Avila de los
Caballeros, which is Avila,
Espeleta, Bernardo de Galvez, Saavedra and Esteban de Galvez attended
Miró. But there are more characters that are in this school that will
also have a relevant role in
the subsequent events in the campaign against the British in the southern
United States as
Benito Pardo de Figueroa, who is under the command of Bernardo de Galvez
and ends up marrying the
Bernardo's adopted daughter, the daughter of Bernardo de Galvez's
wife's first marriage,
Felicita St. Marchand whose biography alone would also merit another
lecture. And then she finished
ambassador of Spain to the Russian court but ambassador of Joseph I.
And later Pedro de Mendinueta
who also worked under Bernardo de Galvez, although he joined the
company later, arrived in
in '82, in 1782 to the Theater of Operations and later became Viceroy
of New Granada after Espeleta.
as we shall see. What is forming the royal military school of Avila de
los Caballeros,
sorry, is the future elite of the empire. In the words of Alejandro
O'Reilly himself who was the one who
founded this school, one of the Irishmen in the service of the Spanish
crown who is a very long time
tradition, in his own words, selected those, and I quote, officers
whose prompt instruction would the service for their talent, application, conduct and proportions to
be promoted to chiefs of
already general corps. Those selected for the academy in Avila were
perfectly aware of the
who were to be the future elite of the empire and then took place what
was called the mystery of the
of Avila. They believed it so much that they adopted a very special
quitu. An English major, Willard
of Limpell, traveled through Spain in 1784. He was a spy who was trying
to collect information on the
on the rearmament, especially naval, that Spain was collecting at that
time, but also on the
He became a traveler and then wrote a series of letters that he would
later publish in book form,
but heavily edited to conceal its true purpose of espionage. In 1784,
this major
Englishman, Willard de Limpell, writes mocking the elite officers of
the empire. I quote,
The officers appeared to be very mysterious. They told me that they had
been strictly forbidden to
to communicate to me what their king's intentions were about their
institution and they were so cautious about
who even refused to show me the classrooms. Although there was no reason
for it, for so much enigma,
for they had little to hide and, of course, the veil of secrecy was
easily pierced.
Despite the mockery of English, in reality what these ambitious young
students really wanted
was to apply a new model of warfare as opposed to the previous model.
In other words, in the words of Francisco
Saavedra and I quote, would have to fight against ignorance linked to
power. It is the project
the militia. Two sides were formed, the barbilampiños against the
mozos.
old. The barbilampiños were those young, modern officers who wanted to
implement a new
Prussian concept of warfare by applying rationality and science to
warfare to avoid
bloody conflicts, while the old boys were the ones for whom the
courage and valor in combat was everything. Even in appearance they
distinguished themselves. They were
because they were very well dressed, the uniforms were perfect, they
were perfectly
the old waiters were unkempt and dirty, because for them, they had to
be
only courage and bravery in combat was what justified everything.
For the barbilampiños
the empire was opening up through merit. It is by chance at this time,
which is not by chance
that at this time merit is the one that opens, the state opens to
merit. The order of Charles III,
the royal and distinguished order of Charles III, with its motto of
virtue and merit, opens up a whole new
social class hitherto excluded from State Service, to the middle
classes so that they could be
to give a new imperial project. Once they are at the school, a rumor
arises that there is an expedition and volunteers are requested. Theoretically it was
a secret expedition, but Saavedra was made it clear when he says, and I quote again, everyone was well aware
that the expedition that was being prepared
was to take satisfaction from the Moroccans. Saavedra, Gálvez and
Espeleta. They quickly left for Madrid and Francisco de Saavedra again
in his diaries comments on the
trip he made with Bernardo de Gálvez. I started the trip on Holy
Monday, April 10. I left in
company of Don Bernardo de Gálvez, captain of the regiment of Seville,
with whom, without having
I had a great deal of sympathy, which, as is often the case, was
reciprocated.
We were on horseback and I had a very funny ride because he told me
several passages of his life that I had never seen before.
was a real novel. Anyway, we then formed an intimate friendship that
was in some way the
basis of my previous, subsequent fate. Volunteers are presented to the
Algiers expedition
of 1775. We do not have time to analyze the causes that motivated it.
It was an absolute
disaster of its conception, it all went wrong, but to cover it up what
was done was to decorate all
the world. There is no better way to hide a defeat than to give
decorations right and left.
and give awards left, right and centre. In other words, nothing happened
and everything went very well.
Therefore , Espeleta, Pedro de Mendinueta, Esteban Rodríguez Miró,
Gálvez and Saavedra, who were there,
the former, Espeleta and Pedro de Mendinueta, were promoted to colonel,
Gálvez to lieutenant
colonel, Esteban Rodriguez Miro to sergeant major, which was ente
commander. Saavedra was not made
nothing because he had the audacity to stand up to O'Reilly himself and
tell him that what he was
doing was a beastly thing to do. That landing was catastrophic and
Saavedra, who was his aide
in his general staff, he let him know in probably not very diplomatic
words and it cost him
for not having been promoted. At the end of the Algiers expedition, apart
from being promoted, Bernardo de Gálvez
had been wounded. He was the last man of his regiment of hunters to
reembark and refused to be
reembarked until his last man was, even though he was wounded.
Francisco de Saavedra goes to visit him
to Seville where he was recuperating, to Cadiz where he was recovering
from his wounds and there
at the foot of Bernardo de Gálvez's bed tells Francisco Saavedra. At
that time he composed the tonadilla
of the expedition and other very funny toys. He was a man, Galvez, of
great ability for everything and
with a very special taste in music. At the end of the following year
they met again and Saavedra says
again. I met in Seville with my great friend Bernardo de Galvez who was
on his way to Madrid.
He told me that the Minister of the Navy and the Indies had died,
Julián de Arriaga, and that his
The ministry had been divided, conferring that of the Navy to Don Pedro
de Castejón and that of the Indies to Don José de
Gálvez, his uncle, with whom he offered to introduce me if we met in
Madrid. He introduced him and José de Gálvez adopted Francisco de Saavedra as one of his main secretaries. At
this time after Bernardo de Gálvez was sent to Louisiana because he knew French,
because he had been in the
French troops against Portugal and having learned French, she was one
of the most important
the reasons why O'Reilly, who appoints him, appoints him as acting
governor first and colonel of the fixed infantry regiment of the Louisiana and
Louisiana. Bernardo de
Galvez arrives in Louisiana in December '76 and takes possession in
January '77.
of the province of Louisiana, granted by King Charles III in 1786. Up
with Spanishness
reaffirmed with the Castle and the Lion, Castilla y León, and below is
a representation of the river
Mississippi, the great Mississippi River, that there is an Indian lying
down with a jar from which water comes out.
and it is the representation of Mississippi because Louisiana is not
what the state of Louisiana is.
today, it's all the way up the Mississippi all the way to the end, all
the way up to the Canada area. The first thing that
Gálvez has to attract the population, not an easy task.
There had been a revolt against
the Spanish government in 1769, which had to be repressed, not bloodily,
but with much force by an expedition sent by whom? By Alexander Reilly. It is then
established a complicated Louisiana government in which the French in Louisiana are not
nothing to agree to have changed sovereignty, a change of sovereignty
for which we obviously they had not been consulted. They were not citizens, they were subjects
of the French king and as such
become subjects of his Catholic majesty. The problem is that now that
the war is coming
with Great Britain, if we have in our rearguard some troops, some
people, a population which
is uncomfortable or even against the presence of the Spanish rulers,
that is impossible for
to be able to take active action against the British, that's
impossible, it can't but await
What does Gálvez do? Gálvez supports local elites, gives them benefits.
economic, he is tremendously nice, but tremendously nice, he had to be
from Malaga.
We will see the differences between the Malagueños and the Navarros
that will be seen later between the
who is Espeleta y Gálvez. And then he marries Satericita SaintMarchand, who is the daughter of one of
the most important Creole families of the time. The French held
Louisiana since 1682
until 1763, 80 years. The Spaniards had Louisiana for 40 years, badly
counted.
Among all the governors that the French sent to Louisiana, none of them
married a Creole,
none. 11 governors, 11 married to French women born in France. Of the
11 governors who
Spain in their period, 6 married Creole women. T o d a y , an important
plant in the population of Louisiana is of Spanish ancestry due to marriages
between Spanish and Creole women from
the time. Louisiana prepares for war and how is it prepared? By
reinforcing the defenses,
constituting... there is a fixed infantry battalion from Louisiana.
Bernardo de Gálvez has to
to form it into a regiment, he asks his uncle for help, he asks his
father for help, who is at the time
Father Bernardo is stationed in the Canary Islands. Theoretically, an
immigration is made for
be soldiers of this regiment. He obtains information through espionage.
Espionage and
sabotage in the enemy's positions is a time-honored tradition. The
better it goes,
the worse it is for my enemy, the better. And Spain and England I and
Great Britain after that have a
long history of confrontation. In fact, Philip II founded in Salamanca
the school of
Irish. A school that attracted young Irishmen, trained them as priests
and
to Ireland to create unrest, trouble and uprisings in Ireland against
the Irish government.
government... against British occupation and colonization. This
tradition will play a role
The role of spies in Spain's participation in the War of Independence
was of great importance. And the
Indian policy. Spain's Indian policy changes completely here in the
eighteenth century, in the
America, in what Weber studied as the peripheral zones of the empire.
Both in the
North America as well as the extreme South of America. It is no longer
an indigenous policy that has anything to do with
with the indigenous policies developed in previous centuries.
The situation is completely
new, there is not just one culture, there is not just one empire, there
are a lot of different cultures that
one must be conquered one by one. So, at this point, what Amy Bushnell
describes as a "one step at a time" has been
from conquest by the sword to conquest by contract. And here is an
example of this
contract. This is a diploma awarded to the Talapuche nation by the Baron
of Carondelet,
governor of Louisiana in 1796, sealing the treaty between Spain and the
Talapuche nation. There
We see Baron de Carondelet with a talapuche theory and he is handing it
over, if you see it in his hand,
has a medal. That medal, as we shall see, will have a very particular
history. The encounter
of Puta Cortada is the first thing he does, one of the first things
that Bernardo de Galvez does when
arrives. It is a meeting in which he brings together a series of
indigenous groups to attract them to the
Spanish government. The problem with the medal that the Baron of
Carondelet had in his hand is that
was very small. When Fernando de Leyva in the year 1771, 1781, has a
meeting in Illinois with
the chief of the Cuapas, the chief of the Cuapas tells him I am delighted
to be a subject of the Spanish king,
but the medal that the British have given me is bigger. What does
Bernardo de Galvez? He calls his uncle, well, he writes to his uncle, through him,
not by Twitter, but by Galleon,
and he says look what's wrong with me, the Spanish medal is too small.
Ah, don't worry,
we are going to make one that is much, much bigger. And here you see
the comparative size of the medals
British, the three above, and the medals, first the one for merit,
first Spanish,
the small one, by Fernando Leyva, and then the much larger one, so that
it would not have any
problem. The idea of this medal was to be worn by the Indians as proof
of their fidelity.
to his catholic majesty. Bernardo de Galvez, his experience with the
Indians.
Apache and his experience during the Louisiana, make his writings still
used today as the
main source for knowledge of the Indians in this region of the United
States at the end of the
XVIII century by anthropologists. Already we arrived at the war, on June
21, 79 Spain
finally declares war on Great Britain. Carmen Iglesias has been
explaining to us all the
Intrinsically for this declaration of war to take place. On August 27,
1979, Galvez leaves in
In his own words, we set off, as they say, on an adventure. There,
crossing
as seen in this picture perfectly by Ferrer Dalmau, probably crossing
these marshes as
swamps was what caused him to contract one of the diseases that would
kill him. Spoiler alert,
Bernardo de Galvez dies at the a g e of 40, very young. Here is a shot
of José
Portillo and de Bagui who shows us to show the campaigns to the Gold
Mississippi. Bernardo de
Galvez with Miro, who was his second in command, attacked by surprise
the Fuente Manchac and took it.
without firing a shot. But as they were very inexperienced troops at his
disposition
Bernardo for the next attack against Baton Gouche, he decides that
instead of attacking him by surprise
has to take to the assault so that its troops can draw blood and be
called veterans.
He returns to Nuevos León and needs reinforcements to attack his next
target, which is mobile,
sent Miró, he sent him to Havana. A little earlier he had arrived in
Havana under the command of the
Regiment of Navarra his good friend José de Espeleta. Miró arrives on
January 24 in Havana and
On January 25, a war meeting was held with the high military commanders
in Havana. Esteban
his diary, he reflects the bad atmosphere that already existed at that
time against Bernardo de Galvez and his
expedition against La Movila and Pensacola. As he looked in his diary,
Dios José Navarro said
and I quote, let us be disillusioned because he is trying so hard to ask
the troops of Navarre for friendship.
and that is already known. The Navarre troop was the regiment commanded
by Espeleta. Miró told him
answer, it is true, it is true, Your Excellency, it is true that my
governor wishes the colonel to go José de Espeleta both because of the friendship that unites him and
because he knows his aptitude. Later in
a conversation with Juan Bautista Bonet, head of the Spanish Navy in
Havana, Cuba,
Bonet directly confronts Miró and tells him, what the hell do we have
with La Movila and
Pensacola? Better this, he means Cuba, than 50 movilas and 50
Pensacolas. It is true that there is a
order of the king to go and I do not know if it would not be convenient
to disobey the king's orders sometime
when it is understood that if his majesty were here he would do the
same. This is insubordination,
but it is an insubordination that the Spanish conquistadors had been
doing since the 16th century.
In the words of Ricardo Palma, a Peruvian historian who invents half of
what he tells,
but he tells it very funny, he says that there was an old Spanish
saying of the conquistadors that went,
God is in heaven, the king is far away and I am here. For Espeleta it
was very clear that the general
Bonet did not want the expedition and liked all possible excuses to
delay it.
or prevent it, but he had no choice but to obey the orders that came
from the court.
Then, on March 7, Miró and Espeleta left Havana with reinforcements for
La Movila. While
Meanwhile, Bernardo de Galvez had departed with his troops by sea to La
Movila.
Espeleta and Saavedra are arriving, but they are late. On March 14, La
Movila is conquered and
They arrive on March 30. N o t h i n g happens, Espeleta appoints him as
governor of La Movila and
Miro is promoted to lieutenant colonel, Galvez is promoted to general,
field marshal.
With this, Galvez is no longer the commander of the Fijola Louisiana
Infantry Regiment, but he is no longer the commander of the
becomes the head of the expedition and Miró is the commander of this
regiment. La Movila is a
is a highly contested possession by the English because it allowed them
to launch attacks against the English.
new Orleanians. But in order to consolidate La Movila, the first thing
to do was to attract the indigenous people.
of the area. The problem was that there were two very different
personalities. The Navarro Espeleta
and Bernardo de Galvez from Malaga. With two different backgrounds and
two very different families. Espeleta was
a l o n g - e s t a b l i s h e d noble house, with a well-established position,
whereas Galvez was
an absolute newcomer. He was the son, the nephew of the Minister of the
Indies, whose parents,
that is, Bernardo's grandparents were starving farmers. In other words,
a new generation that is making its way, which is completely different.
But
of the different, an intimate friendship was born which, as we shall see,
did not hesitate to say the most
horrible to each o t h e r . Espeleta couldn't understand this regular
warfare, the need to attract
the Indians, the indigenous people that Bernardo had. Without the
support of the Indians, it was impossible to maintain the post of La Movila in possession of Spanish sovereignty.
But Espeleta needed
something to be able to cajole them. Beads, medals, big ones, small
o n e s , whatever. He couldn't reach
nothing, because the warehouses in New Zealand were empty. And
Espeleta's attitude was
very regimented, very serious, if you will forgive me, very Navarrese.
And what he said was, I prefer to have
10 enemies uncovered than 4 hidden. Galvez was much more sibylline, he
had a better waist,
and tells him about his attitude towards the Indians, Alexander Cameron
says that he was an envoy from
the British crown with the indigenous people of the area. Galvez even
humiliates himself to the point of kissing of
The warriors are treated with great respect by their main chiefs.
He even insists that they go to visit New Orleans, which was completely
unheard of for him.
a governor of the Spanish crown would stoop, according to him, to make
these friendships with the Indians.
The problem is that there were no groceries, there was no food in the
warehouse, there were no gifts to be given, there were no gifts to be
given, there were no gifts to be given, there were no gifts to be given.
give them to the Indians. And then Espeleta writes Desesperado Galvez.
As for effects
of Indians, that is to say gifts for them, I do not speak because as
they come we will soon be out of the way.
And since I have such a serious house, that is to say, I am so elegant,
and I don't know how to gypsy them like Mr.
Galvez, it will be necessary to give them more to keep them happy.
Galvez was not bothered to be called
and that his house was not so serious and he answered him, my friend
Espeleta, what Westamercé
of care, of tragedies, of disasters, with nothing more sensitive to me
than
Westamercé's situation. But first of all think Westamercé that I am not
capable of abandoning you.
With a little more patience and some perseverance, we will try to make
amends. A thousand letters I have written
to Westamercé since I arrived here in Havana, that varying the
circumstances and not finding
nothing that was the case, since the cross to date have been torn and
remained as the inker. One thousand
times it was resolved to dispatch to Westamercé couriers and a thousand
times it was again considered convenient that
the first news that Westamercé had over there was the expedition
itself, but without the
gifts to offer, with no goods, it was to be expected that the British
would attack, as happened on the 7th of
They were repulsed by a heroic action of Espeleta and Espeleta did not
hesitate in his report,
in his office, counting the victory, to tell Bernardo de Galvez in a
letter of January 81.
I think it's done, they will have been well reprimanded this time,
because in the midst of everything.
favored them that day. They have had the loss of four officers who by
their valor were worthy of
better luck and I do not doubt that they would have had it had they not
encountered troops who knew about it
and that they did not know how to flee. The first attempt to attack
Pensacola begins when Bernardo de Galvez from Nueva Leon goes to Havana. There, a series of war meetings
take place with
Victorio de Navia and with José Solano who arrives with a squadron in
Havana. We will see later the attitude
of each . On October 16, the squadron left Havana for Pensacola. A
tremendous
The hurricane disperses it and Bernardo de Galvez has to return to
Havana with his troops. In that
If he had previously had problems with the rest of the Havana commanders,
from this moment on, he would have had problems with the rest of the
The knives are held high. Thus, on November 30, 780, a war meeting
takes place.
in which, according to the words recorded in the minutes of that board
of war, Juan Manuel de Cajigal
carefully chose his words as he said, the general immediately and with
even greater selectivity
a second expedition is prepared in preference to any other.
Second expedition, different from
the first. Hergo, that another general send it, even says and I quote,
the general commissioned for
the company's management will explain what you more or less need and
those in charge of the others.
The branches will state what is in the possession of each one for
regulation. José de Solano that
arrived from Cadiz with his squadron he was well aware of who Bernardo de
Galvez was, the
nephew of the Minister of the Indies and the interest that the Minister
of the Indies had in this whole operation.
and therefore very cautiously, albeit hesitantly, it is my vote that
the expedition should be made.
because the king has ordered it to be done in preference to any other
object. Bernardo de
Galvez answers them, it is true that fortune has not been very
favorable lately, maybe
peace may surprise us, and if that happens, congratulations to all the
other classes of the world.
state, but we military men to whom the king after having kept us in
peace we have
useless in the war, with what air can we continue to grind a sword full
of rust that does not
We knew how to disentangle himself, who did not know how to disentangle
himself on the occasion. But the card he had up his sleeve
José de Galvez, the uncle of Bernardo de Galvez, the minister of the
Indies was Francisco de Saavedra, who, in
In January 1981 he arrived in Havana and from that moment on he began
to analyze the situation. According to
Francisco de Saavedra the generals of land and evil were not in
agreement with each other,
while yes respectively, as it cannot be less of happening seeing the
superior projects
to the m e d i a , each boss litigates on behalf of the company that is
linked to his or her personal glory.
Saavedra commented that the navy chief had to be won over with
gentleness and dexterity to the
Bonet, who was basically good-natured and good-natured but obstinate in
authority labels.
and resolute in trouble. Farewell José Navarro, the captain general of
Cuba, earns it and I quote his
Although he is well-intentioned, although he has been weakened by his
many years, he treated him with deference.

as when consulted about the seat he would occupy on the war council,
Saavedra replied that he would never
I would dispute about labels that I would be honored to occupy any
position even if it were
the last in a crowd of such decorated people. But here's the secret plan
what Francisco de Borja Medina calls Galvez's secret plan, which is to
force Galvez's
situation, basically go out with whatever troops there are, plant at
Pensacola and from there ask for
reinforcements, saying that if you don't send me reinforcements,
obviously blackmailing me, if you don't send me
reinforcements this operation is impossible, forcing the situation and
that is where Saavedra counts in his
memories of the secret plan of Bernardo de Galvez. We talked at length
about the expedition
of Pensacola and confided to me his plan of attack, which seemed to me
to be well combined, but I was always of the
that the forces at their disposal were not adequate to the task, for
together the troops they had at their disposal were
the ones that were to be assembled in Louisiana and the Movilá would not
arrive in Havana.
to 3,000 men when the British had a garrison of two veteran regiments
there and
the help of many nations of friendly Indians, and from one day to the
next they could be helped by
of Jamaica. He knew better than I did the inadequacy of his means, but he
did not dare to ask for more troops.
not to delay the departure of the expedition. I agreed to provide him
with some reinforcements after his departure.
of people and warships, especially, and this is the key, if it became
clear that the English were
to send help to the plaza.
The expedition departs for Pensacola in February 81, arrives at
Pensacola's outer railroad and there they
the mess between the sailors and the military on land. There is a
confrontation between José
Calvo y la Zábal, who is the leader of the squadron that was put at the
disposal to transport Bernardo
Gálvez and to escort his troops. In this group there is a person who will
be very important in the
years to come, who is Francisco de Miranda, who is one of those who in
Venezuela and Colombia is known as the "Francisco de Miranda".
as the precursor of the independence of these countries and is a
fascinating character, whose biography
would be enough for another lecture. Suffice it to know that his name is
inscribed on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
as a general of the French Revolution. According to his diary, which is
wonderfully shameless
as he tells things and with a calmness, on the 18th at two o'clock in
the afternoon he docked at the side of the
ship, of the main ship of war, a boat with the engineer officer
Gelabert, exposing of
from the general, i.e., Bernardo de Gálvez, to the commander, i.e., the
commander of the squadron.
José de Calvo, José Calvo y Razábal, that a bullet from A-32 picked up in
the camp he was leading and
The only thing that was present, was the ones that distributed the
entrance fountain, were anchored at the entrance to the Pensacola Bay. The sailors said that it was impracticable at the
entrance.
said it was practicable. So, he's showing him one of the bullets, which
are the ones that shoot.
the English from their fortifications.
These were the bullets that were handed out by the fort at the entrance
and that whoever had honor and courage would
Bernardo de Gálvez, because he was ahead with the Galveston, which was
a ship that was a
He had been directly commissioned by him as governor of Louisiana, to
take the fear out of everyone. He created
a terrible problem between the t w o . Gálvez's challenge is the famous
phrase, "I've only gone sons".
me so that no one else would take the risk, he got on, he boarded the
Galveston. The Galveston was a
ship that he had at his disposal because he was governor, that is,
outside the squadron, and he sent
To hoist the flag of the squadron commander, that is to say, of
admiral, in accordance with his status of
General, and headed for the entrance to the bay. He knew very well that
the entrance to the bay was safe.
because he had a lot of spies, which we'll talk about later, if time
permits, and he knew
perfectly that the batteries of the Barrancas Coloradas fort are
positioned in a way that is
that ships sailing very close to the coast could not be fired upon,
which meant that
He knew that n o t h i n g was wrong, but he could not convince the Marenos.
Whereupon, he took the
ship, his own ship, went in and out again, and when he came out he again
challenged Calvo. The
The problem of this is the context of the confrontations between the
navy and the army,
which are always the same combined operations. The army thinks that
the navy, in the time of
Avella ships, is simply the one who transports them, but the one who
actually conquers
the positions, are the infantry when it takes the enemy proposals,
while the armadas
only fire at each other from afar, while the navy sees the infantry as
someone who can only shoot at each other from afar.
who has no idea of the intricacies of navigation, and especially at the
time of the
navigation Avella. An example of this is this map preserved in the naval
museum. In the museum
naval is this map of the capture of Pansacola. It is not dated, but it is
made around a bit
after the fact. What is relevant about this map is that of the 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, of the 8
maps that exist, only one mentions land operations. Only one mentions
Bernardo de Galvez, while only one mentions Bernardo de Galvez, while
only one mentions Bernardo de Galvez.
that the sailors are mentioned 27 times. That is to say, it is omitted,
it is put that exploded the
It is put as a fortuitous explosion. It was not fortuitous at all, but
This illustrates very well the confrontation between the army and the
navy at the time. The
siege and Galvez sends Miro to the movila to look for reinforcements.
Reinforcements are produced arrive at Espelete and Miro, arrive at Espelete and Miro, arrive on
March 23 and 24,
in Nuevo Leandro there are 1,600, but more are missing, and that is where
what we have called the magic happens.
of Saavedra. Saavedra succeeded in convincing the high command in Havana
that this special circumstance
that could occur, which was an eventual reinforcement of the British
troops in Pansacola,
had already occurred. In reality, what was there was a report from an
anonymous fisherman saying that
I had seen a number of ships departing in that direction and signaling
to each other.
This was reported to the authorities in Havana and Saavedra exposed it as
a clear example that
was a fleet to reinforce the British positions at Pansacola. Evidently,
nor was there the fisherman,
those ships were never seen, but Saavedra was very well in charge of
putting land on the
The expedition that was being prepared was intended to reinforce the
Gálvez in Pansacola. On April 11 they arrive there and the siege of
space begins. This is a plan
and there are the three fundamental positions of the British, Fort
George,
the Prince of Wales Redoubt and the Queen's Redoubt. The Spaniards are
doing the sapping,
building trenches, constructing forts, bastions. In the rational
warfare of the 18th century,
the six sedios are a very technical thing, very engineering and the step
is little by little and consolidating.
positions. Galvez is frustrated. On May 6, he speaks with Francisco de
Saavedra and confesses to him the
He was in a great predicament and the great undertaking he had in mind.
In Havana they had given him
very short supply of bullets and there were so few of the 24 calyrian
bullets left that they were most needed,
which was not to be used to serve the batteries two consecutive days.
Almost all of them were collected
The soldiers used to pay two reales for each one they brought,
but this did not make up for the fault. That is, they would take the
British bullets, hammer them a little bit to
They kept them a little round and put them in Spanish cannons to give
them back to them. That is to say,
is like Gila's war when they tell the enemy to let us know when you are
going to come for
take the bullets away and you distribute them to each other. There were
no bullets. So what do you do? You take the bullets from
British cannon and return them. In this situation, these are all
Saavedra's words.
Gálvez was determined to assault the enemy's fort that same night by
escalation, whose possession was
would very soon surrender the other two forts that were dominated by him
and would shorten the period of
This was the reason why the site was very long and the delay was
detrimental to the projects.
previous ones. Saavedra and Espeleta tell him, let's not do anything
crazy, wait, this has to be solved by
but what he didn't count on was that on May 8 dawned, the Spanish
batteries started firing with red bullets, i.e. bullets heated with live fire,
the
bullet, which is iron, turns red, goes into the barrels and is fired
for
in order to provoke a fire in the enemy. One of those bullets were so
quiet, it produced
a terrible explosion in the arsenals of the Queen's Fort and
immediately Bernardo
de Gálvez ordered his troops to attack. There it was conquered, there
or in a similar place, it was where
this flag was conquered. This is the photo of the flag before being
restored in the Museum of the
Army. This British flag is one of those that Gálvez conquered in his
campaigns and that he sent to the
to Spain as well as to peninsular Spain as a souvenir. In fact, the
latter sent it to Macharabillaya,
to his hometown. The history of this flag is even more amusing. When
the French
invade Spain in 1808 and are going to pass near Macharabillaya, the
peasants of Macharabillaya
take this flag and shouting Gálvez and Spain, they go out to attack the
French soldiers. I do not
I can imagine the face of the French soldiers when there would be a
group of Spanish peasants under
British flag shouting Gálvez. But, of course, I have not found any
documentation, but I should have
be fascinating. And the troops won. This is the flag of the Fixed
Infantry Regiment of the
Louisiana. But the ratchets of the empire were Galvez, who would end
his days as a
viceroy of New Spain. José Zpeleta, who became the viceroy of New
Granada, where he implemented
a series of tremendously important enlightened educational reforms.
Francisco de Sabera,
that at the time of the Napoleonic invasion of Spain he was one of the
leading members of the junta.
president of the Provincial Board of Seville. And many more, such as
José Francisco Antonio Solano, president of the Provincial Board of
Seville.
Ibote, who was sent to spy in England to get hold of the secrets of the
cover of
copper from the ships. Charles III made him governor and captain general
of Venezuela, and also made him the
granted the title of Marquis of Socorro. Esteban Rodriguez Miró, who
succeeded Gálvez as
governor of Louisiana and author of a very important description of
Louisiana. But,
Apart from the military trenches, there are the diplomatic ones. And
there was Luis de Usaga doing
spying and contributing. Luis de Usaga was governor of Louisiana, he
married a sister
of Bernardo de Gálvez's wife, who would be said to be brothers-in-law,
married later, and was the one who began to
to establish the network of spies that would be fundamental for
Bernardo de Gálvez. He was the first captain
general of Venezuela and later captain general of Cuba. Juan de Miralles,
the first informal envoy,
formal confrontation with U.S. authorities. Dies at George Washington's
home in
Morristown, cared for by the sable woman, George Washington's wife.
George Washington was a very reserved person, very withdrawn and little given to outpourings of
feeling, but there are a couple of
letters from them, from George Washington to the widow of Juan de
Miralles, in which he states
the grau of friendship he had maintained with him. Diego de Gardoqui,
the first ambassador of Spain
the U n i t e d States, that during the war of independence he became rich
because it was through
how the initially secret Spanish aid to the American rebels was
channeled.
He was consul of Spain in London, minister, i.e., ambassador of Spain to
the United States,
Secretary of the Treasury and ended up as ambassador in Turin. But the
trenches of the
the hardest espionage were characters such as Father Frantoinio of
Sedella, who constituted one of the most important
network of spies throughout Louisiana. Juan José, the son of La Puente,
who was from the family of the
Florida, which in 1763, when Florida passed to the British, maintained
its contacts in St. Augustine.
and throughout Florida and is a key source of information on the
situation in Florida.
British. Or Miguel Eduardo, another spy who is also gathering
information. Jacinto
Panis, a captain of Galvez's army who visits Pensacola on an unofficial
mission, and the mobila
that his reports are the basis for Bernardo de Galvez's plans to attack
Pensacola. But
there are many others, the troops, many men whose faces and of whom only
a few remain.
their names, men from all parts of the empire, from Peninsular Spain,
all of these
regiments. Whether the regiment is called Soria, Guadalajara, Aragon or
Navarre, it is not exactly the same.
who has been recruited in that area, originally yes, but yes it can be
more or less. Indicator of
where they come from, from Havana, as the regiment said, the fusiliers or
the colored militias in the
which involved José Antonio Aponte, a free black who organized an
Aponte revolt, a
revolt to free the slaves of Cuba in 1812. Troops from Louisiana, that
is, troops from
French blood, troops of France, not only infantry but also navy, AngloAmerican troops
volunteers and the indigenous people. In other words, Bernardo de Galvez
could not do anything on his own, he did nothing.
alone. When he is awarded his coat of arms, the motto that appears is I
alone, there is Bernardo de
Galvez on the Galveston entering the Pensacola railroad, but he himself
confessed more than once
that he never did anything alone, that he could never have done it
alone. Great Britain from the conquest
of Pensacola is corraled, as shown in this engraving published in 1782.
Here is a coquer
of Spain, the one at the t o p , which is the symbol of Spain because in
theory, in theory,
when Julius Caesar conquers Britain he carries a coquer of Spain,
theory. France is a cockerel,
in theory the symbol of the French since the Gallic War with Julius
Caesar as well.
The United States is a snake because there is a famous engraving by
Benjamin Franklin in which
states that the United States is like a snake that if it is cut into
pieces, it does not have
future and has to unite to face the British power. And a pug that is a
puppy like lapdog.
a native of China who came to Holland in the 16th century and who in
theory saved Wilhelm
of Oranje from an attack that the evil Spaniards wanted to make on him.
And then there is a fox in
the right-hand corner which is representing Charles James Fox who is
the head of the opposition of the
British government, which was much more favorable to the American
rebels against a confrontational politics. So what the coquer of Spain is saying, what
Spain is saying,
is I will have Gibraltar so that I can call myself king of all Spain.
Of the objectives that Spain had
This war the only one that was not achieved was precisely Gibraltar and
escaped by a pearl.
France, the rooster is saying I will have my title from you and I will be
called king of France.
Americans I will have America and be independent. The Dutch I'm a
reefer as always.
I have been. The British lion is going to give you a good English beating
so that you all fall down at once.
And Fox advises his majesty to strike first at Monsieur, i.e. the
French. The targets
The Spanish role in the war was to weaken the British empire, to
recover specific territories very
Gibraltar in particular, but at the same time the independence of the
United States was seen as a
a by-product of this war, a by-product that the rulers of the time had no
problem in recognizing was certainly dangerous as a precedent for
Spanish possessions.
in America. However, if there was a choice between having the British
Empire as a neighbor in America
or a republic that was tremendously weak, overextended, the alternative
was clear,
it is better to have a weak state like the United States of America at
that moment because
until the U.S. Constitution was proclaimed, the governmental structure
was a tremendously light confederation that did not foresee any kind of
growth. The
Spanish rulers opted for if this independence is a by-product, then
welcome.
whether this independence is because it is an enemy or an opponent that
is easier to handle. The entry
Spain's official role in the war not only tipped the scales in favor of
France and Spain against
Britain, the number of ships, the number of soldiers and the number of
power, but also how much
Britain was forced to adopt a defensive position, until then it had been
able to
attack where and how he wanted from the moment of Spain's entry into
the war he has to
and has to defend itself as a whole, which means that it goes from
offensive to defensive, but it is not only the British who change the war to the entry of Spain,
when Spain enters the
an agreement is signed with the French and it is made very clear to the
French which are the
Spanish subjective factors in that war that the French assume, and
therefore I am not only saying it
I at this moment French historians say so, British historians say so,
Anosaxon historians say so, but more important than t h a t , in a letter
to the Marquis de
Castrís that the French Minister of the Navy at the time to Admiral de
Grasse who was Admiral
The head of the French expeditionary forces in the United States tells
him it is made clear to him
that in his orders that land forces in North America would be commanded
by Gen.
George Washington and his naval forces would act and I quote as
auxiliary to the Spanish forces the entry
Spain's involvement in the conflict affected the American
revolutionaries, as they were unable to develop the
France actually modified its alliance with the Americas by changing and
to broaden the objectives of the conflict before it ends there are a
lot of outstanding issues that
I would have liked to discuss with you whether or not there was a direct
influence of independence.
of the United States in the independences of Spanish America that took
place over a period of time.
There is a fashion in historiography to talk about the Atlantic
revolutions and to put in
all these revolutions as if they were directly inherited from each
other should be put
in question or rather not Anglo-Saxon America as the periphery of
Hispanic America in the late
of the 18th is not my idea, it is an idea of Elijah Gould, a historian
at Johns Hopkins University.
that British America was much weaker and much less developed than the
rest of the world.
developed that Hispanic America at that time talk more about the
Spanish Louisiana of the families
Louisiana Hispanocriores of the Spanish secret aid before and end
before entering the
the amount its calculation the ways its effectiveness Spain gave much
less money directly to the
but obtained much more in return from the French for the independence
of the United States.
The United States as a global war the role of indigenous people in the
war the new indigenous policy
of Spain in North America, the role of African-Americans was a subject
dear to the heart of doña
carmen and for me that of strong royal grace of saint teresa of moses
espionage between the
empires the issues that remained open in north america between spain
and the united states
independence the legality of the mississippi the borders with florida
the history of
evolution of the image of the united states in spain and spain in the
united states tremendously
linked to the specific political moments of each of the moments and the
surprising the striking difference in weight between the history of weight history
in the states
united in spain ended on a note of optimism in the face of the assumption
generated that
this subject is not known it is true that it is not sufficiently known
probably I have worked on it
basically from the point of view of the U.S. academy, not the academy.
I refer to our scholars in the U.S. academy for the relevance of the
Spain's role in this war is fully consolidated among historians.
it is true that it has not permeated, but in order for this to permeate
there are a series of initiatives that are already underway.
for example, the queen socia instituta carried out a fundamental work for
the ladies' association of mont Vernon or also the children of the
american revolution organizing seminars summer of galvez was named
citizen adopted son
adopted by president barack obama, which has only happened six years
ago.
seven times throughout history the first of them was seen in the
churchill era.
impossible that this would have been done a few years ago I don't go into
the initiatives that there are
of Spain, of which there are many and very relevant, lastly, we would
like to thank the work they are doing
the areces foundation's royal academy to promote a better and greater
knowledge of paper
of spain in the american war of independence many thanks to
Subscribe to the channel!

