Spain and the independence of the United States: Hugo O'Donnell and Duque de Estrada. The Military Scenario


With your good, she, dear director, dear friends, dear colleagues from the academy, thank you all
very much for your assistance
accompanying us in what is the third day in which we commemorate the Spanish participation in the war of
independence of the United
States of America. Those who were lucky enough to attend the inaugural conference given by the
Countess of Gisbert,
received a plan in which some movements of force, of military force, some arrows, some colors of place names that
were especially important in the
development of a war it was very long lasting. In reality, the war, like so many others, starts quite
slowly and then speeds up until that
moment in the battle of Yorktown, the year in October 1981, in which the circumstances already see who is
going to end the war victoriously. Well,
this map that we have in our memory, because those 13 American colonies appeared from the south of French
Canada then

to the north of the
Georgia and North Florida still Spanish at the time. And in it, as I said, well, two outstanding battles appeared,
that of Saratoja and that of Yorktown, October
1977, October 1981, because it is in that time limit where the fate of those who already consider themselves
United States will be decided. United
and America. And in those two main appointments, well, the most important thing of all lies, of this military
scenario that we already call in
Military Slang, theater of operations, because it is very similar to the scene, be it tragic or comic, because indeed
there is a scenario , there are some
actors, the actors who are the ones who receive the applause of the public, but some actors who can do their
representation, thanks in
the first place to the scriptwriter or the director or even the stagehands and the opening act.

And it happens that in all those troop movements in which the French do appear with color in
discontinuous blue line in the sea, Admiral de Grasse's fleet, which was not very important, but what we did
absorb is that there was not a
single Spanish soldier, which does not mean that Spain was not present and in a way that I consider
absolutely definitive.

At this moment, in these two definitive files, Saratoga is because it is the moment in which the American army
comes of age, becomes a Europeanstyle force, a force capable of fighting in the open field, it also had something from ambush to another equivalent
army and supposedly much
more trained and advanced. And in both moments Spain is definitive because with regard to Yorktown, with
regard to Saratoga, the north of
Yorktown is much further south, well, a little distanced at that same height, although separated by those
territories

of the Indian nations, since there is that immense channel of the Mississippi of more than 4,000 kilometers,
practically navigable at least
up to these points. And it turns out that this entrance door of access or denial of access, thanks to an activity,
an initiative, an offensive by the
Spanish army to which we will return, well they get hold of that door so that the English are not
going to have possibility of receiving
reinforcements and the Anglo-Americans, which is what it is called at the moment, will receive it. And as far
as Yorktown is
concerned, the year 81 is a battle that is very doubtful that George Washington would raise it.

In the planning that he does
with Admiral de Grasse, a French admiral, well, he comes to the conclusion that a definitive battle should not
be waged if the meters are not
available. And what is imperative at this time is to have liquid cash, dollars, hard pesos that only Spain can
provide. So that a character is
required who is Alassazón, great king of New Spain, who is Don Matías de Galvez, in all this story they
appear as protagonists, well, of the first
magnitude that saga, that Galvez family that is located in key administrative positions. We have Don
José de Galvez, secretary of the Universal
Office of the Navy and the Indies, naturally competent in these matters. We have this Don Matías, the king of
the big king of New Spain,
who will be responsible for an activity and an action, well, very, very important, although unfortunately
we will not be able to focus on it,
as far as he has fought the English to the south of its own dual kingdom, in that Central America and
more specifically in that mosquito, on that
mosquito coast, to which England recognizes the sovereignty of Spain, but in a very particular way,
because it violates it very frequently and will also carry
out a mission very important in the domain of the Caribbean that the Spanish would come to hold. Well
then, as I say, immediate and urgent assistance of
economic liquidity is required. And Don Matías Galvez, through Cuba, through Havana, later through the
rebellious ports, since he sends an amount
equivalent to one and a half million pounds from Tornesa. When we talk about tornese pounds, it means that we
are talking about French currency or
currency translated into French. The tournée pounds, financial account currency of French finance. And the
contribution is so
decisive and therefore the victory, we cannot say that the victory, but we can say that the battle was
fought thanks to this money that
was able to provide all the means and that this battle divided into victory. Well, someone as unsuspecting
as this starch from Grasse, since he affirms
that the battle was won thanks to the Spanish contribution, which was definitive. Which is very significant or go
to a starch
French contemporary, well give them the credit that they do, in everything else, well they would sign up in
everything that refers to the contribution,
to the aid to the American rebels. The Grasse starch specifies it not in official documentation, but in
his notebook, in his personal diary.

But it happens that, in addition to this main stage, there are other prosceniums, there are other equally
fundamental and decisive scenes in this war,
which is a war, if not world, if universal, if global, that is going to have other theaters apart from the Americans,
the Caribbean, the North American
territory itself, the south of Spain, well also the Atlantic itself. And from the Atlantic, in this case, they will
be troops or maritime means. And the
Atlantic itself, as I say, the fundamental English Channel, Gibraltar, because the rock is not just the rock, but
all the communication channels
of the English projection towards the Mediterranean. And also those East Indies, not the West, the East, in
whose defense another will also be
involved.

of the naval powers of the moment, which is Holland. So there are many scenarios, and in all these scenarios,
from those that were shown
in that shot, they are present. And in a majority way with respect to the French themselves, the army and
navy of Carlos III.

Although we have already heard them in the conferences that have preceded us, we will possibly talk
about it again, since we know what triggered the uprising.
of the colonists I am going to allow myself to comment on something from the point of view that
corresponds to me, from the military
point of view. We have to take into account that when the 7 years war ends, in 1963, the 7 years war for the
French and for the English, for the Spanish, it is
the war of the last three years, since Spain entered through Loyalty to the promised word, due to loyalty to
the family pact, he goes to
war knowing that the war is practically over in a defeat of the Gorgonian powers. Well, when that war
is over, for England is surely at the height of
her power. Thus, it has succeeded in driving the French out of Canada, eliminating the threat from
Canada, it has also managed to eliminate
the threat from Spanish Florida, it has kept Spanish Florida the same as Canada. And with regard to the
territories of Louisiana,
which is the only thing that there are foreign people in that subcontinent

North American, since there has been a transfer that, from being French, has been delivered by the French
monarchy to the Spanish monarchy, a
somewhat poisoned gift because the French monarchy cannot afford the maintenance expenses in such a
conflictive area and with such
an aggressive attitude by the power with which he has just signed peace. It lies, as I say,

at the height of his power, but he also finds himself with an impressive war debt, a great war debt that
naturally he wants to balance
and he tries to balance it, then, with the means, with the means at his disposal, well, by the two normal
means of these cases, reduce
expenses and find means of income. With regard to reducing expenses, naturally the war has ended,
naturally the only power that remains
is Spain, which is a peaceful empire, it is an empire that, as I said, suffers the consequences of the
interference of others, but that keeps a lot
of breaking into terrains that are not alien.

Spain is not an enemy, so, not even
a potential enemy, so they decide to reduce military spending, of course those large armies that they have
maintained and have maintained
largely thanks to Jorge's loyal subjects at this time III in the American colonies. According to the
calculations that are very reliable
because they come from the ideal person to provide them, who is the seventh Count of Fernán
Núñez, who would later be the first Duke of
Fernán Núñez, who affirms that in this seven-year war the American provinces contribute to the English
crown no less than 30,000 sailors, that
is to say, practically half through the ports, which naturally are very fond of the sea and also provides troops
equivalent to 25,000 men. So,
alleging that they want to reduce expenses and also alleging that the American provinces themselves can
defend themselves, since they are
withdrawing veteran troops. When I speak of a veteran troop, I am referring to a purely British troop, naturally
Irish, naturally Welsh, naturally Scottish,
much more Irish, but I am also referring to a troop of new extraction but with very good results, which are
what they call the Germans. .
We have to take into account that George III is now also an elector of Hannover and it is these
Hanoverians who are going to contribute a lot to the
attempt to recover or win the English arms. So England withdraws troops. England also tries, when I
speak England naturally, I am using a
colloquial term but I am also using a term of the time. No one talks about the UK or talks in the

Foreign correspondence speaks of something other than England. So the British consider that they have
enough troops and they withdraw,
but at the same time that they are withdrawing troops they also want to obtain taxes and so we return to
what you already know perfectly well
about all these tax measures. Tax, the word tax itself implies a cohesive character, something that is imposed
and that is imposed by force,
which will be the other element that will
be very definitive at the time of the outbreak of war. It is carried out from the year 63, after the war, because in
64 the first measures of
a tax nature began to be taken, all of which we know going through several, not only taxes on imported
merchandise but also other types of customs
and also with a mercantilist criterion of course but also a political criterion of political dominance. All these
riots happen, the Boston Tea
Party is only one of them, so that the English government reflects on whether this measure that they
have made to withdraw
to save means to withdraw forces is the most appropriate and then, well, they commit another one again
mistake that is to bring back all the
troops. When they bring all the troops back, well, you are at a time when there is already a moment, for
example, that bloody example of
the Middlesex padlock has already occurred, well it is a little late to bring troops because it is naturally
interpreted as an intention to
impose taxes with bayonets. So when these new troops arrive, it also supposes a burden for the American
citizens, they still do not have
that condition of city, because they have to house the troops, they have to feed the troops, they have to
dress the troops. Of all the aspects, the
most conflictive will be that of accommodation, the accommodation of garrison troops or stay is always in
conflict with civil society. Let us think,
for example, of the classic literature on the mayor of Zalamea, since indeed a series of
circumstances are produced that end up
determining in something that we all know, that publication of a new nation in the declaration of July 4, 1776
during the second Continental
Congress and it is in this Continental Congress that the first army to be called the Continental Army is created.

An army made up largely of people who have been active on the British side in the previous war and from this
moment or even before
this moment the Spanish intervention appears. A Spanish intervention that is called, with an administrative term
of the time, by reserved route. By
the reserved route means that we are going to try to help the rebels but without this being behind the scenes
and not becoming a casus
belli.

Anticipating 17 days to the declaration of independence of the second congress of Philadelphia, that is,
on June 17,
1776, the first great Spanish contribution was presented in American hands. What has been
happening? Well, observers from all
over Europe are watching with concern, some more and others less, since the events that are taking
place in the year 1964 and with regard to
those two powers that are still pending
that a new family pact is signed but that they live in that environment of having a common enemy, that
cold war environment that they have with
England. And some conversations are being held between two characters who are capital at this moment,
who is a minister of Louis XVI, who
is the Count of Bergen, and another count, the Count of Aranda, who is our plenipotentiary, the plenipotentiary
of the Catholic
Majesty before the most Christian majesty in Paris. And they already consider themselves somewhat worried
but also seeing the opportunity
that is presented and they decide to carry out similar aid, aid through reserved channels and aid that has
to be financial, aid half for half. I am
interested in emphasizing these two aspects, both that it is an underhand help and that it is a help half by
half because both are two points
that we are interested in knowing when claiming how we should claim the great contribution of the kingdom
of Spain to independence from
the United States. The first aid, another economic aid prior to the one that I have mentioned, also of a similar
amount of one million pounds from
Tornese, was delivered to the Count of Aranda, from there it passed pounds from Tornes, it passed into
French hands and from there it
passed into the hands of the of the insurgents. But it happens that this reference to a few million pounds
from Tournament is good because it does
not guide us much. It is very difficult to determine what translation that million has in currency with so much
insonance of the moment. But fortunately
we know what that million was used for, therefore we can get ideas of the amount of the Spanish
contribution, exclusively Spanish.
It is known that 216 cannons were bought with that million pounds from Tournaise. The continental Army is
going to have two main scourges apart and
the lack of artillery. So, effectively, those 216 cannons, also mortars, gun carriages, thousands of bombs,
thousands of bullets, 300,000
pounds of gunpowder, rifles, bayonets, etc.

And what I find most significant, 30,000
uniforms. 30,000 complete uniforms. Equipping a troop with uniforms, having a uniformed troop means already
having a troop that is almost
veteran or in the process of becoming a disciplined European-style troop. And it is not something a trifle. That
also interests us because a
circumstance will quickly arise that will prove me right in this regard. But it happens that since the
previous year, since 1775, the crown of Spain is
authorizing, is tolerating a contraband of war through a house that is going to become famous because
later throughout the war it increases
that it is the house Gardoki, a commercial house that has a privileged situation since through the
port of Bilbao it has a regular commercial relationship
with the ports of Massachusetts.

Massachusetts to the north is one of the centers of rebellion, of sublimation. So already through
from the Gardoki house, well, all these elements, if that is to say, if they remain secondary, such as bombs,
bullets, tents, well, it comes through this
medium.
But it is that Spain had and is making use of another medium much closer to those regions of the south of La
Luciana where it will be, but the third of the
roosters is not yet there, the archetype of the intelligent, cultured and opportune Spanish officer that he is going to be
there but that they are preparing his arrival
for someone very directly related to him who is his brother-in-law Don Luis de Ulza.

And don Luis de Ulza who is the civil and military governor of New Orleans as head and capital of the area and
of the entire area more or less limited
because the territories are immense, the cities are minimal and the towns are far away. Well, Luis de Ulza receives
a commission, a
very difficult commission, which is to help the patriots in any way he can, if you want, the rebels if you want, as you
have seen on the other side,
without creating any special case.

What Luis de Ulza does is first of all prepare himself for war because he understands that this starts badly and
that it is going to end worse. So what
it does is based on a disciplined unit, the only one in the area, which is that fixed regiment of the luiciana that
Ferrero Dalmao has artistically
represented and appears in our invitations with which we have related to all of you. Prepare that and fortify the
city of New Orleans to
constitute, as I have said before, a refuge for all those ships that come to help the rebels. But the same media
also arbitrate the similarities that are being
made from the peninsula. La Luiciana is a French region of culture, French in soul, French in spirit, closely
linked to the house of Hugo Rubón who
represents Luis 15 and later Luis 16 and who is not at all happy with the situation that they have been given without
counting on them to another
realm, to the realm they belong to. There have been a series of uprisings that have fortunately been carried

on the right path, on a different path than usual, as we will point out at the time. And it will be General Gonzaga who
will also take advantage of the French
commercial establishments, specifically that of Roderic Óctales e Companys. Through it you get to all the supplies
that are going to be brought from
Havana. And it does so through the Mississippi, naturally through the Mississippi but approaching out of the
range of the English artillery that is
on one side, on one shore, on the shore, let's say Spain. Time passes and in September 1776 the unexpected
victory of the rebels in Saratoga takes
place. A surprise for everyone, even for the Americans themselves. For the Americans who already, who already call
themselves Americans for the Spanish. Because General Gonzaga himself, when he contacts one of his generals, General Lee,
addresses him as General of
the United States. For the first time, at least from the Spanish point of view, this term appears in our
documentation. The battle of
Saratoga takes place in which the Indians themselves desert that until then, like some Indian tribes, who
have facilitated the repression of those
that until now dominate and the dominant victories of the English side. And the Count of Berchent,
who is waiting for the opportunity to intervene with
a declared war, well proves or thinks it proves that the American army is already a veteran army, that it is a
European-style army that the
risk of intervening is well worth it. And so he carried out a political decision, perhaps not as beautiful
as the allied crown of Spain deserved, in my
opinion, which is not to declare war on England, which in reality had not done anything either, but rather the to
recognize the new

United States, which is also a way for England to immediately declare war as it happens. And I say that it was
not a very elegant way because it
was expected that this decision would be made for consumption, it would be made for consumption by both both
both crowns.
Because, among other things, Berchent is also constantly urging Carlos III, and Carlos III is very
reluctant, as we already know, to
go to war, not for military reasons.
Spain is a great power. For personal reasons, for reasons of personal criteria of the absolute monarchy.
And because he is a born pacifist,
it is no coincidence that it will be a reign, especially in the realm of the sea, it will be a very sweet reign, but very
very azudito.

And while it tries to burn the last cartridge, which we will now see and which in fact we already know from
previous conferences, what it
does authorize is that this aid be increased on request. A great researcher who is Reyes Calderón, a
great specialist in this, since
he affirms that only in the year 1777, that is, immediately after Saratoga, since the funds given to
the Americans amounted to 2,489,906 reales,
equivalent to 6% of the country's income.

This important remittance of funds can be carried out because Spain, thanks to the fact that they are at peace,
an armed peace if you will, but a peace,
since it has been able to bring an immense amount of
Indian companies that have been held up in the Indian ports, because there is an English blockade and a
tremendous risk that
privateering, not only the fleets entering, but also the English privateers, will interrupt that transmission. And
it is found, it has been calculated that they
happily reach almost 33 million strong pesos, so that Spain will be able to afford to continue
contributing these high figures and it will allow itself the luxury of rebuilding its navy until it becomes an exemplary
navy in every way and also the army. The
army will follow the guidelines that the great Frederick of Prussia is already beginning to set. But as I
said, Carlos III does not want to declare war, at
least he wants to remain calm, leave his conscience alone that if war is declared, it is when the whole race is
available, so he offers himself as a mediator
in the hope of solve their problems definitively in a definitive way with England and with the generosity that
characterizes him. So he proposes, of course,
his great wounds are Giroaltar and Menorca. It has an immense empire, but it is that Giroaltar and Menorca are
what later constituted the proper
Spanish nation, it is the core of our nationality. So he proposes a very generous proposal, apparently
very generous, which is to exchange Giroaltar above all
for one of the very rich Spanish islands in the Caribbean or France that will later be compensated for by
France.

But England is not for the work, is not for the work for two reasons. One because it is indeed the barren
rock that is Giroaltar, since it is a bastion in which a
lot of money has been invested for its defense since the war of succession and it is also the way to control
the routes of the
Mediterranean. Despite the fact that Spain also offers the Oran square or any other that could be administered to
compensate Giroaltar, because what
Spain wants is the territorial unity, physically, of the bull's skin. But the fundamental reason is not that
and it is that the English government, with a
reasonable criterion, believes that this matter is a matter of State, it is an internal matter of the kingdom that a
foreign power cannot see
interfering. So, as is well known, after this mediation attempt failed, on June 16, 1979, an alliance treaty with
France was signed in Aranjuez. Again
we are looking for a third solution. I don't know

England declares war,
much less recognizes the rebellious rebellious provinces. For now Carlos III
he is not for the work, but a peace and aid treaty is signed which, once again, naturally leads to war. And it is time
to return to the
zones, to the effective theaters of operations to which I have referred. We will start with that place where the
young Gálvez family is now, Bernardo
de Gálvez, who has succeeded his brother in command and with very intelligent criteria has managed to
unite all that population of French
culture in the interests of Spain.

On the one hand, he does a bit of what Cortés did with Moctezuma's daughters and is to marry, in this case him,
and also to marry his captains to
ladies from the good society of New Orleans.
And far from punishing all these rebels who have risen up against the crown
of Spain, because he manages to unite us in a military unit. This, and naturally received, since aid from the base,
of course, the great base of Havana,
will be able to carry out an offensive campaign. In reality, throughout this war, the offensive is clearly on the
side of the allies of the Bourbon
powers. And with this intelligent attitude, he also integrates some Indian tribes hitherto enemies and
also a black population, slave or non-slave, to which
he also gives the chance to contribute to this extremely interesting project on which we cannot focus on
his vision of new Louisiana that
unfortunately will not take place. And carry out this emblematic campaign, I have allowed myself in this
little sheet that we have given you in the
upper part, there is a bit of the symbol of what is going to be the second congress, that from those pieces of
all the colonies form an offensive
element capable of opposing the English. And at the bottom, the Spanish offensive, on the eastern shore
of Mississippi, between 1779 and 1780. Of course,
this from the eastern western shore

It depends on the position that the rapporteur occupies. Well, from 1739 many more actions are carried out
than those that appear here on the
map. Many important posts and simply artillery posts that form a kind of device to prevent what we said about
the open and closed door from
entering. A very difficult device to disassemble. And Bernardo de Galvez is going to get it. At first it will be
Manchac, it will be Richmond,
New Richmond, it will be Baton Rouge, it will be Natchez and many others. And finally, on
January 14, 1780, La Movilá. La Movilá is one of the most
important centers together with Fort Charlotte en belly tail, which fell into the hands of the Spanish.
And what it means is a very important
blow, a very important mental blow, but also an effective blow because 153 cannons are achieved,
which are of great interest, and 1,400 prisoners.
And now let's take the homomire, the spyglass and direct it towards another theater of operations in the Atlantic
and specifically the English Channel.
From the first conversations that take place in Paris between the two condescritos, because you think about
what will be repeated
later, history repeats itself during the Napoleonic war in a quite viable project to conquer England, to conquer
the island of Great Britain . France
would contribute an army that it already has cantoned in the vicinity of Brest, especially since it is going to be
the Brest squadron, the French
squadron of the three French departments, that is going to intervene, an army of 50,000 men. And Spain is left,
because Spain can afford it, the most
important contribution in units afloat.

A total of 40 ships, one with the other, will bring together a sum of 100 warships that gives control of the area
of operations with respect to the
English fleet. What is pursued with this? Of course,
If all goes well and we conquer England, then Napoleon's dream later. But it is enough to try, because this is going to distract many ships
that are going to have another mission different
from that first launch of operations that is going to be the definitive one. So everything is prepared, but from the first moment it is discovered that
there is a disparity in criteria, a very
notable disparity in lines of action between the French starchers and the Spanish starchers. And specifically between two heads,
almost the most distinguished, which are d'Orbillet on the
French side and Mr. Luis de Córdoba y Córdoba, or Mr. Luis Fernández de Córdoba and Fernández de Córdoba, who have
complete criteria. Taking advantage of the
notable superiority it has at sea, France intends to pursue the English fleet, which naturally will not be there for the job, and give them a
final battle and then proceed to bring the transport
ships. What Don Luis de Córdoba proposes is something that later time will prove him right and

is, no, no,
Let's take advantage of the fact that now the English don't want to fight, let's move the army, because if the English fleet shows
up we have more than enough means, at least
to distract the one from that sea. As the command is held by the French starches, the French solution is chosen. Well, the English fleet finally
has no choice but to put up a
fight. Here I have brought a very beautiful vintage drawing to the south, the part of the island of England, where the two fleets
meet, more or less in an almost symbolic combat, a combat in
Tablas on August 31, 1779. Both fleets finally present the line of combat that was what was in style then, or else in parallel lines, the ships,
the ships have the cannons on the sides. The
power is not in the prow like the galleys, but on both sides and they are very powerful, from 70 onwards, cannons onwards, or back against.

Waiting for the opportunity, which he still doesn't
quite know how to do, to break the line and envelop a number of enemies. This rupture did not occur and as Fernández Duro
recounts very amusingly, because there was a
bombardment and immediately afterwards the sea was as salty as ever.

Well, indeed, while time has been wasted, a terrible epidemic breaks out, which we will return to if we have time to talk about it, which causes the
French
ships to have to disarm in port, the crews to enter with a sanitary cordon and between that and between that the commanders were going to kill
each other, both the French and
the Spanish, because that alliance is dissolved and each fleet decides to use itself in the war as best suits it. At this time the Count of Bergen,
who is not as generous as the
Admiral de Grasse when it comes to recognizing the merit of Spain, since he protests to the Count of
Florida Blanca who has come to
replace Grimaldi in the Secretary of State, that is, let's say, in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
speaks from where Luis de Córroga in certain
terms, well nothing chivalrous, speaks of him as Sergieleratic, indeed, because he was a serious man, a
responsible man and he was a man,
well, older than what squad leaders normally thought they were. Well, the Sergieleratic fleet is sent to a more or
less strategic area where it
can attend to two things. One, to prevent there being convoys in the direction of the insurgent provinces and
another, to strengthen or
create a second cordon in addition to the blockade squad in order to conquer the Rock of Gibraltar. About the
Rock of Gibraltar or the Gibraltar
campaign or the failure of Gibraltar, if we put a few quotes on it, there would be a lot to do.

That is to say, it is a moment in which it is the mirror of what the Spanish army is, a Spanish army that is
at a European level, a Spanish army that
has the ability to draw parallels, to make us constructions of the best level of contribution and not only some
ingenuities of the French
anti-takeaways from Darsun that are merely anecdotal, but others of much greater importance and that ends up
in its objective not because it
gives up or because the Churches have won, but because the peace is going to be signed in the in the year
83, because until the year 83 the
means are being arbitrated, in fact I have also brought some floating batteries in which they are already
preparing for another
siege or all the sieges that are necessary, since a plaza of this nature is with patience and with weight as it
is obtained. And it is that peace is
reached with England by means that are not honorable either. Benjamin Franklin who had gone to the
court of Louis XVI, who had been raised in
honor of multitudes, who had been applauded by the entire Enlightenment society, very prone to new ideas,
we must bear in mind that as regards We
French are living in a pre-revolutionary situation, which is not the case in Spain. Well, despite the promises to
never sign a separate
peace, the rebel provinces sign a peace with Great Britain, both only have to win England enchanted with it,
since it is already lost after
Yorktown, because it cannot, above all The great scourge of the English army in this case is that it cannot
replace the casualties that
occur. In such a way that they happily sign some peace preliminaries in which they sign not only a peace, but
a treaty, but also friendship, but the
best way to achieve it, a commercial treaty.

So that France, faced with this situation, the second betrayal of the Spanish monarchy,
to the beneficent and Spanish monarchy, a little too optimistic perhaps, since it also leaves Spain alone
because they are not
willing to do what they learn from Spain and that is to continue with the Giraltas assault. But we are not
going to be left with that bad taste in our
mouths, although Spain all know the result of the signing of the peace in Paris in which Spain, well,
territorially, is reinforced, Menorca is
achieved, it is returned again, it already has all the floridas it had And because he has also a clear
dominance in the Caribbean but
loses sentimentally, it is what Carlos III felt all his life, well, two blows. But I say that to stay a little with a better
taste in our mouths, we have left Admiral
Don Luis de Córdoba, well, there on a cruise, as they say in maritime terms, seeing if he can
avoid there being a convoy that goes as he has not been able
to from someone else. Admiral to do so, some other Spanish admiral such as Don Antonio de Ulloa also narrowly
captured a convoy. But he is
lucky that on August 19, 1780, while he is cruising with the 16 ships of which he has accounts and some
French ships of intermediate size that have
been added to him, he sights a convoy of 63 sails that for Finally, the lookouts detect that they are enemy
sails and the hunt is ordered
without quarter, that is, a deployment already naturally sealed and that will give the most complete success.
What is this convoy? This
convoy is actually two convoys that taking advantage of the fact that they are already in the English Channel
because there are no enemies in sight
because they have double vision. A convoy with military equipment is going or intends to go to Kingston,
which is the capital of Jamaica as you know
and is the great English base of operations where a fleet is being lent to be able to counteract the combined
fleet of the Franco-Spanish area.

And there they intend to reach the height of the Canary Islands and take advantage of the trade winds
as Columbus already said while another
fleet leaves, heads, intends to skirt the cape to reach the Gulf of Bencana, the Mozambique channel to
counteract the war effort that they are
carrying out. out the Dutch.
Well, as I said, on August 9, 1780, this fleet was sighted and we proceeded to what the ordinances and
tactical tests call what I am
saying because this system of carrying out the hunt with resounding success one by one the ships that
there are many of them gigantic since
those that go to the eastern indies were called those indiaman that are cargo ships but very well defended very
well defended that belong
to the East Indian Company.

Well, some captures take place according to versions 56 or 55 and 56 and only the ships escape by chance
because some ships to which
those French auxiliaries are in charge of persecuting us, force it on me but it is not a matter of neptitude but
simply do not have the luck
and also the puppet quality that the friend Luis de Córdoba has.
Specifying now and finishing I will say
that what was obtained, the loot that was obtained was nothing less than 140 million reais, that is, translated
now, if I can translate it, one
million and a half pounds sterling, which in order for us to have a possible comparison, we will say that it is
equivalent to what the English
achieved in the previous war with the conquest of Havana with everything that Havana entailed and half of
what the Spaniards could bring from
America to start the war. The Duke of Fernánduñez once again underlines this situation in which
England sees itself with inferior units afloat, it sees
itself losing the war in American territory and it also sees itself with a once again enormous war debt that
Fernánduñez estimates at 24 million sterling
whose revenues absorbed more than half of their annual income. So that he actually had reasons for signing
the war and to finish by simply
outlining something that has already been underlined, I am going to simply expose my point of view that
after having said or having tried to
point out the great help that he gave Spain to the independence of the United States, why are we not
recognized? Why haven't we
been recognized? I am going to avoid three possible solutions, which I see as above all. In the first place,
with regard to the United States, we have
to take into account that the moment they achieve their independence, the objective becomes Spain, the
possible enemy, declared or not, is Spain.
Up to the point since the year 95, very shortly after, in 1795, on the eve of a new war with England, Spain has
been forced to cede a good part of the
Mississippi basin, not at the mouth, but the immediately superior territories follow. because they fear that there
will be a stable alliance between
the Americans and also between the English. So from that moment on, it was much more profitable to underline,
for reason, the help of the French.

The situations that you will see later, even the mon russe doctrine itself, allows me to be oriented much more,
not just against Canada, but
also against English Canada or against other possessions of the French Caribbean, but especially against
Spanish rule and that it will land
in 1998, since this last fact is perfectly contemporary, with a visible gesture of that also political and
intellectual friendship of those two powers of
which one feels heir

and intellectual of the other. The French Revolution responded to the American Revolution in the
same way that the American Revolution had felt
in some way heir to the uprising of the United Dutch Provinces, since those ties are underlined and that
immense mass is built at the entrance of the
statue of freedom and that phrase of liberty enlightening the world is cultivated,

the two sister powers welcome anyone who comes from outside of freedom.
On the part of the French, well, it is logical, as we have pointed out, that they bring disgust to their sardine.
From our point of
view it is logical, and also from abroad, that the aid from Paris would be seen as much more open, I insist that
it is at least
equivalent and much more official than that of Madrid. Luis XVI does not have the scruples that Carlos III has,
on the other hand, because as the
Count of Aranda would already point out, well, indeed, in some way we were fighting against the things in
which we believed then. We are
talking about the old regime, a regime that sells itself abroad as an outdated regime in the face
of these new ideas of freedom, in which we
all participate today. I am speaking at one time.

And he reaches the result that is curious to verify as in the World History Encyclopedia of 2009, when citing
French aid to the American war
of independence, he refers to that battle of the canal.
And he refers to that epidemic, and oh surprise, he talks about it being a contagion due to the Spanish
crews. It's a bit the same as the
Spanish flu from the beginning of the war, from the first European war. There was not a single Spanish
soldier in the trenches at Verdun, yet
it was dubbed none other than the Spanish flu. Well, that the epidemic was Spanish and that is easily and easily
refuted. What was the squad
that disarmed and that had to wait until several years later to intervene again, while Luis de Córdoba, that vieux
yératic of which the
county of Florida Blanca in a retaliation letter to the county of Arlanda tells him that he will to turn out that this
vieux yératic has made the brats of
Brest very small. And with that good taste in my mouth, ladies and gentlemen, I have abused your attention.
Thank you very much
to all.