Spain and the independence of the United States



Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen academicians, Areces Foundation,
dear Raimundo,
friends of the Royal Academy of History, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome
to all of you and thank you very much for your attendance to this
first lecture on a historical event.
which I think is exciting and quite unknown, in general, or at least
not so well known.
as it should be, as is the independence of the U n i t e d States, breaking
away from Great Britain,
which would not have been possible without the help of Spain and
France, and especially, as we shall see,
that of Spain and Spanish America. Thank you very much for the support
of the Areces Foundation.
for several years to this Royal Academy and thanks to our protectors
of the civil society
who have always maintained their help in difficult times with their
generosity and friendship.
Allow me to make a brief presentation of this cycle, apart from the
fact that it will be made in each
of the conferences that are scheduled. As you will see in the program,
three illustrious
and wise historians will talk about topics they know in depth from
their specialties.
and his excellent research and publications. Professor Mr. Luis Ribot,
full member of the board
of this Royal Academy, will talk in detail about the involvement and
motives of Charles III.
to become involved in the American Revolution. Don Hugo Donnell, also a
member of the academy,
and the best connoisseur of everything related to military and
especially marine movements,
The first part will deal with those scenarios of war in which the
interests of each power in the
conflict. And Don Gonzalo Quintero, historian and diplomat, who has just
published a splendid
book about Bernardo de Galvez, the great Spanish hero, he will delight us
with his great character and
other illustrious Spaniards involved in the American Revolution. Juan
Francisco Saavedra,
Diego María de Gardoqui, José Edez Peleta, of some of them I will also
say something. All of them
with complex and dazzling lives. So it is my turn to make a general
introduction of the
subject. A sketch recalling the facts and the names interrelated in a
stele
of chronological and significant events. They are a kind of guide or
landmark to follow
this vibrant story you are about to hear from Spain and America. Let's
start at the beginning.
The United States was born as the centerpiece of an international
coalition. In a global world,
since the first globalization achieved by Spain with the discovery of
America First,
The expedition initiated by Magellan, but successfully completed with
the round-the-world voyage of Sebastián Elcano and closed with the
search and achievement of finding how to return
with the appropriate currents and by new routes from Asia to Spain.
That we owe it to to the famous Andrés el Tornaviaje, which is called in history. From
Andrés de Urganeta, who was born in 1508,
died in 1568. Cosmographer, navigator, Augustinian Friar since 1553,
after having been a
adventurer and important discoverer, who, once Fraile had embarked on
the Legazpi expedition, traced by
the first time to return from Asia to America in 1565, he succeeded in
doing so and thus opened the way to
for the Manila Galleon and other expeditions, without encountering the
Portuguese. This is how the
first globalization. In that global world, all war and conflict, all
serious conflict,
had repercussions and affected all the European powers in the struggle
for international hegemony,
with all that this represented in the economic, military, population,
etc. fields.
It is the repercussion of wars as in our own present is happening to us,
even though in
different historical context. Spain in the 18th century was still a
great European power,
is not the undisputed hegemon that it was during the 16th and 17th
century, with the extensive positions in
Europe, America and Asia. As y o u all know, you will remember that upon
the death of Charles II without offspring
The war of succession breaks out and the European territories are lost
to Spain. But,
as he said in the XVIIIth century, still has a formidable power with the
kingdoms of the Indies virtually
intact. The great enemy for Spain continued to be Great Britain, in
alliance with Portugal,
which had been pursuing the monopoly, among other things, since the
aforementioned war of succession,
the monopoly of black seating, the big business of slavery from Africa
to America,
to which I will refer later. For Charles III, the British threat was
very
important, especially for the new Spain and even for the peninsula
itself. After the
peace of Paris in 1763, which put an end to the Seven Years' War, the
war in Europe, as you may recall.
that settles the Franco-British rivalry in favor of England, a
territory so strategic
and important as Florida had fallen, not all of Florida but a good
part of it, had already fallen into the hands of
British, something that for the Spaniards was very serious. The
British sought to control the
the world at that time, the possibility of opening a path in America to
the Pacific, in addition to
to recoup the war expenses of that seven-year war that had been won
but had been
costly in men and money. Also to make up for the expenses of war
precisely
through the American colonies, both their own and those of others,
something that not only concerned the
Spanish ministers of the time, such as Florida Blanca and the Count of
Aranda, who were very sensitive to the
What was the relationship between
England and its colonies, its North American colonies? You have to
look before 1700, compare before 1763 and after, i.e. before the end of 1763. England or
Great Britain before 1763
The government allowed a high degree of autonomy for the American
colonies,
North America, which he referred to as a policy of healthy neglect.
Remember that the vast territory of northern America was populated with a
long tradition of
of English-speaking president migration, a diversified migration in
general, which can be
The fact that they are classified into different groups is very important
for understanding the history of the United States.
First o f a l l , the important migration, the well-known migration of the
pilgrim fathers of the
Mayfrowers and all sorts of Puritans, Quakers, sometimes persecuted
religious communities or
uncomfortable in the old continent who were seeking a spiritual refuge
and freedom to exercise
their cult. All of them, many of them emigrated from the 17th century
Pilipeos. That of the fathers,
the emigration of the pilgrim fathers arrived exactly in 1620 at the
Cape and made landfall in
Cape Cod. Note the names. It is interesting to remember that before
disembarking the 41 passengers
on the boat committed themselves to a coexistence governed by their
beliefs,
creating a small sovereign republic, isolated for at least half a
century, although nominally
accepted to be under the royal power of Great Britain. Not all of
those who followed Puritan groups to
sometimes very rigid and even some fanatics followed that pattern. So
there were in those
communities in North America tyrannies, autocracies, internal
breakdowns in many of those communities
almost theocratic in some cases, which were creating different colonies
under variants of what was
we can call the same puritanical political philosophy. A puritanical
background that will be profoundly
in U . S. history, albeit with many variations. For example, the
levelers
Englishmen led by Roger Williams founded a fairly tolerant colony in
the United States based on the
in the love of all human beings and applying collectivist and
democratic ideas. It was a
exception, but it is worth remembering all this moral discipline that
better or worse could have been creating
a politically ordered society on an immense territory, without army or
administration
central still. I had, if you will allow me, a personal aside, but it
was very important,
the good fortune to be able to do research in the north of America
almost bordering Canada in the second
In the middle of the 20th century, community names such as Leila still
existed until the 19th century,
as Icaria, at that time there was only one Oneida corporate that was
dedicated to cutlery,
to make cutlery that had a lot of fame, but that still breathed the ambit
of those utopias that
generally failed. Secondly of all these communities of this
puritanical background.

A second group that we can call the wave of exiles from the events that
took place in
In 1688, there was also an important migration in England.
Third, let us not forget that the settlement of common criminals or
political convicts also
who had the option of migrating to avoid imprisonment or execution and
of course all
type of merchants, traders and adventurers. I think it is important to
remember these precedents
to be able to visualize the radical differences with all that the
formation of the monarchy entailed.
Hispanic. The different origins, the different policies that are not
between what was the empire and what was the empire.
the special institutional fabric of the Catholic monarchy in America.
Nothing to see.
We will talk about it later. After 1763, that is, when after this
seven-year war,
England needs to recover. It has certainly come out of the Seven Years'
War, as I said before,
as the great colonial gemonic power against France and Spain, but
lesser, of course, it will be so to
from the 19th century onwards, but not before, when it achieved the
total fractionation of the world
Latin American. But anyway, that is not our subject. To recover from
the war, what do you do?
because it decides the payment of new taxes in the North American
colonies.
Starts broadcasting
various laws, the Stamp Act of 1775 and the imposition of import
duties
for all items, including basic necessities. Resistance was tenacious in
the colonies.
Since they had no procurators in the English parliament, they maintained
that the latter had no right
to impose new taxes in violation of the written privileges and with
subjetos dinarios
of the colonies and rejected the possibility of sending representatives
to a parliament in which they would
would always be in the minority. They considered themselves, I was
told, vassals of the king, but they did not
were vassals of the English nation and its parliament. At first I just
wanted to follow
with the autonomy it had, but a series of circumstances that many of
you will remember,
such as the enactment in 1773 of a tea law that discriminated against
North Americans.
regarding the West Indies company, violence and riots have broken out.
As you remember, because it even appeared in movies, a crowd of
citizens in costume
of redskins, assaulted several English ships loaded with tea in Boston
harbor and took it to the
threw them into the sea. The British reaction was very strong and they
approved in the parliament some actions that
the Americans considered intolerable and which implied the closure of
the port of Boston and the
the evolution of the Massachusetts colonial charter which was
something like the charters.
Immediately after all this, the North Americans from the different
colonies were mobilized and convened a first congress in 1774 in Philadelphia to study some common
attitude. They start there
values, ideas and political values are already emerging, fundamentally
based on Yolock and of course
in Montesquieu and Rousseau and Harrington, that is to say, in all
those European thinkers. And already
at a second congress, also in Philadelphia, the following year, in 1775,
with the representation
of 12 colonies, because Georgia was not yet represented, preparations
for independence began.
and organize a continental army, electing as commander-in-chief of the
army George
Washington. The congress was held in May. In August the English king,
George III, declares to the colonies
in a state of rebellion. In January 1776 Thomas P. exhorts in his
pamphlet, Common Sense,
to fight openly for independence. In May of 1776, the independence
fighters finally obtained
the majority in the continental congress they have created and on July
2, 1776, it is proclaimed by
unanimity, in other w o r d s , translated, these united colonies are and
by right must be
free and independent states. Two days later the declaration of
independence,
drafted by Jefferson, to which we will return later, consumes the
rupture of the sovereignty treaty.
by Great Britain. It reaffirms the independence of the colonies, in
addition to adding a list of
cases in which the monarch had not fulfilled his duties, with which the
king himself maintained,
had been removed from office according to himself, the colonists told
him. Jefferson's statement,
prepared by him and read publicly by him, is one of the most important
political manifestos in the world.
The most important of these were conceived at the time of the
Enlightenment and had a tremendous influence,
as we all know. The famous Jeffersonian preambles, we can call them,
justifiers.
of the revolution, were based on the use of categories of rational
natural law,
the individual's free developmental disposition to justify the purpose,
form and legitimization
of political power, based on the goal of the happiness of the individual,
of the citizen,
of their consent for their representation in Congress and, very
importantly, the checks and balances
and the separation of powers. The political motives are the
fundamental ones, as we know there are not so much
social reform as there will be in other revolutions, but they are of a
democratic tendency and in no way
are radical. Hence, it is sometimes discussed whether the revolution can
be called a revolution.
revolution, in any case, a revolution led by upper strata imbued with
the values of the middle strata, individual merit, work, equal
opportunities,
private freedom. Remember what we have seen in that diverse migration
we talked about earlier.
in North America. And very importantly, which we will come back to in
the end, at no time was the control of the revolution. In fact, the first four presidents, as you
will recall, were
leaders of the independence process and the military power was always
subordinated to the power
Congress. Let us recall the unforgettable names of the first four
presidents,
the two famous Virginians, all of whom were involved at the forefront
of the revolution. George Washington,
of course, who had been the commander-in-chief of the colonial army,
which we have already mentioned,
John Adams, the second president from 1797 to 1801, the spokesman for
the pro-independence faction in the United States.
the first international Congress, vice-president of Washington,
Jefferson, the author of the Declaration
of Dependeria, 1801-1809, Chris Madison, 1809-1817, father of the
Constitution. Naturally not only
these names, the beach of the men of the American Revolution, as we
shall see also
The work of the Spaniards on that beach was decisive. Allow me a small
espozo reminder of some of these great Americans who from beginning to
end
became distinguished statesmen, several presidents after these four we
have mentioned,
important writers and scribblers, we would say, or high disseminators,
educators, even,
of the values and organization of the new nation. In addition to the
four, everyone will remember,
well, of course, Franklin, I called myself 1708-1790, the modern Socrates
of great popularity throughout Europe,
received here by Louis XVI in France and by Voltaire and all the
European intelligentsia,
example of an authentic liberal, moralist, profound, without
dogmatism, of humble origin and proud of his
his status and social ascent, a fairly new phenomenon, was also a man of
science,
as you will all remember, inventor of the Lightning Rod, etc., and
social and economic writer, friend of the
of Alan Smith, a real character, Thomas Paine, 1737-1809, an Englishman
by origin, the son of a
a small Norfolk farmer, a corset maker and clerk in the excise
service, emigrates to Norfolk, where he
from England to America in 1774 and from the first moment encouraged
the insurrection. We have already mentioned
his important pamphlet on common sense, published in Philadelphia,
which represented a
radical republicanism that affirmed the right of the colonies to
independence. He believed that in America
The world was starting over, and in a sense it was. He passionately
defended the social contract
for the defense of the individual, a political regime of separation of
powers and counterweights,
separation of church and state and religious freedom.
He was one of the few who
condemned very harshly the enslavement of blacks. In short, he
represents the most radical wing of the
revolution. James Wilson, 1742-1798, immigrant from Scotland, arrived
in America in 1765,
becomes the best jurist in Pennsylvania, intervinactively in the
strong statement of independence in the line of Jefferson and in the defense of just
American naturalism,
of liberal and democratic disposition. Hamilton, who was from 17571804, no, sorry, I am giving his date of birth and death, had been
an advisor to Washington,
although he is in another line, advocate of a federal state, but he
was a treasury secretary very
The efficient federal government laid the foundations for a powerful
federal treasury and made a significant policy
economic. His ideas contrast with those of Jefferson, as I said before,
and he is closer to Adams.
He distrusts the crowd, follows more Macabre and Hobbes, to put it in a
very direct way,
than Locke and Montesquieu. Hamilton was always very concerned about the
division of the
Union, i.e., he already feared what happened in the end, a civil war
in the 19th century between the north and the south.
the south, which resulted in many deaths and a fairly large separation,
although they managed to establish a
balance. But anyway, that's another matter. John Hay, a diplomat who
intervened in the
peace of 1783 with Great Britain, and who is also one of the great
organizers of the development
and all that depended on the justice system, personally and
institutionally, the court of justice and all that depended on the
justice system.
moderate conservative, and many others that we cannot expand on here,
but I wanted to this
small sample in order to be able to assess the people who were in the
front row. Naturally it is already
the war. Let's see some notes beforehand, although Don Hugo Donnell
will explain them in detail and
will be developed in a more specific way, but now it is simply a reminder
of this framework of
events. The British colonies revolted in 1775. July 4, 1776,
the Confederate colonies proclaim their independence and the war
against the metropolis intensifies,
that will last, as I have mentioned, until 1783 with the recognition
of complete independence in
the Anglo-North American Treaty of Paris. Well, and here comes the
intervention and help of Spain.
Since the beginning of the war and even before, Spain has been helping
clandestinely, or rather in a clandestine manner.
covertly, without proclaiming it, to the American independence rebels.
The professor
Ribot will explain in detail next week the foreign policy reasons that
Carlos III had,
avoid open collision, measure the strategy of declaration of war to
its eternal enemy,
England, and so on. And that explains why Charles III maintains the
American Revolution,
American upheaval, then revolution, since 1770 and secretly assists in
the form of a
extraordinary, as we shall see, from 1773 to 1771. This was the time
when, with the treaty of the
France, as an ally in its war against Great Britain, Spain and France, it
is explicitly made
Spain's assistance to the Americans is being provided internationally.
France, which openly supported the Americans, it had little to lose in America, but Spain
did have the immense
and powerful viceroyalty territories and the need to maintain the
secrecy of the shipments of the
before the declaration of open war with Great Britain. Without this
Spanish help,
writes one of the historians who have written a beautiful book, Larry
Ferreiro,
without this Spanish help it would have been difficult, well, we all
say this, to achieve independence.
and defeat the English. England's power was very strong, as we have
seen, that is to say,
and here I quote, the continental army led by Joseph Washington would
never have taken the
victory were it not for the intervention of its two allies, Spain and
France, on the other side of the Atlantic.
From the moment plans for the declaration of independence began in
July 1776,
the army of the 13 colonies was the c l o s e s t thing, writes one of them,
to a group of volunteers.
who of course had hardly any gunpowder, no uniforms, no medicines, no
tents,
nor money to support a war against the British Empire. Larry Ferreiro
too,
the American historian, points out, and this I did hear him say
literally, that if France and above all Spain
focus on that conflict, and I quote literally, was the realization that
it was not about a
the Bourbon nations, but rather an opportunity to contain the greatest
threat to the
potential of both, which was Great Britain. This led to a de facto
resumption of the strategy of
the revenge, he says, against the island nation, the historian
concludes.
American. And sure enough, Britain totally lost the Americas. On June
21, 1779,
King Charles III of the Great War, the great British power, and puts
the whole military journey
Spanish troops, under the command of General Washington, until the end of
everything. But he wanted
I would like to dwell for a moment on the details of the clandestine
years, which were very long, even if only for a moment.
quickly. Know the main intermediaries involved in these activities.
of supplies of all kinds, as well as espionage very favorable to the
pro-independence and
anti-British, who played different roles, shell companies for
supplies,
through which supplies, actions and singular characters were
introduced. For example,
Bomarché, Bomarché merchant and playwright with his ghost company. Or
special characters,
that we are going to see some of them, because it is a very long list,
we could only call it the
The main protagonists of this decisive Spanish battle, about which
Gonzalo Quintero will speak in his conference
of closure. As in the case of the Americans, I insist, we can only
make a brief reminder here.
of some of them. Luis de Unzaga y Amézaga, from 1770 and before,
secretly supports the British troops arriving in America to suppress settlers and to prevent
them from
revolted by the new taxes. Before the massacre of Bosto, he was
already creating a network of spies.
to know the enemy's movements. He is aware of Luciana's weakness and
creates the
Unzaga post, it was called, this name is still maintained somewhere
around, so that
to serve as a source of information and free trade. He was a pioneer in
1776, particularly in delivering the
supplies by secret means, helps General Lee and Patrick Hanke, who is
considered a founding father in
United States. In 1782 he was named captain general of Cuba, a key and
privileged point,
where it continues with military aid and tons of supplies to the army of
operations. There they are
all the peleta titles, and of course the most important of all, Hallgate.
Your blocking plans,
for example, of Yorktown Harbor, was instrumental in winning that battle,
as we shall see. After 45 years
in the American continent, in the service of the Spanish crown, he
returned to Spain, to his native Malaga,
leaving his brother-in-law Gálvez Bernardo in New Spain and in the
Spanish embassy in the United States already,
to Cardoqui, to Diego de Cardoqui, his cousin. Diego de Cardoqui,
merchant of Bilbao, personal friend
Washington, whom he accompanies when Washington becomes the first
president of the United States.
in 1789 at his side, there he is in a place of honor. Diego de Cardoqui
is the first Spanish ambassador.
in the U n i t e d States, he also participated in the Grandestine
supplies, in the victory of the battle of
Saratoga as early as 1777 and in the others the same, in Pensacola and
Yorktown.
Juan de Miralles, was one of the
Cuban businessmen with major business achievements, was fluent in
English and French and had a good knowledge of the
transatlantic contacts. Given his undoubted capabilities and loyalty
to Spain, Miralles received
instructions to establish informal contacts with the continental
congress, we are talking about the
The great period, as royal commissioner of Charles III, was a good
appointment. His role was decisive in
the channelling of Spanish aid in those years of greatestinity and in the
years that followed, of course.
In 1778 he arrived in Philadelphia, was very well received by Congress
and became very close friends, they were very
friends of Washington and himself. He created several trade routes for
supplies to the army.
continental, he was one of the biggest lenders through his companies and
also a good spy for
to transmit secret reports to Havana with news of the situation in the
13 colonies. He was also, and it is worth noting, an intelligent
mediator in defending the interests of
Spain in the face of U.S. expansionism, managing to prevent the
continuation of the plan.
to attack Florida without participating, without Spanish participation,
to whose monarch it corresponded,
The title to the territory was held by Charles III, the Spaniard. And as When the war ended, Spain regained the Floridas, although Charles III
in Spain
were let down by the failure to recover Gibraltar, the main objective
of King Charles and his
counselors, and so far. Miralles died very early in 1780 of pneumonia
at home, in the house
Washington's personal staff, personally cared for by Washington's
wife, Martha, and the home of the future
president. His burial was the first funeral with military honors for a
foreigner, an event
The event was attended by all congressional representatives. An
additional note of thanks
of George Washington to Spain is beyond doubt. You see these personal
friends, but in addition to those
personal relations, the one who did not get to know Carlos personally.
III nor Bernardo de Galvez,
did not coincide. He always explicitly expressed his gratitude to Spain,
the help he received from
This was not followed up, as we know, and we will briefly mention it at
the end.
I do not want to leave out Juan de Francisco de Saavedra y San Gronis,
also appointed royal commissioner for
Charles III. In 1761 he organized the Navy, the battles won against
the enemy at Saratoga,
Pensacola, collaborating in the blockade that facilitated Yorktown's
victory. He was always close to
Bernardo de Galvez, the commander of all troops in the Caribbean,
including the French.
Francisco Saavedra was the coordinator of the joint operations with
the French, with the
understanding he had with the French Admiral de Grasse.
The three of them were the
that they had the decision to blockade the port of Yorktown which
facilitated, of course without it,
French and Americans could not have won the battle of Yorktown. There
is a theme that even if it is
I do not want to put it as an example for you to see what Spain was
doing completely. Well, Saavedra
sends 5,000 French soldiers to attack the blockade. Meanwhile, the
Royal Navy
Spanish under Solano's command was left protecting the battle of
Yorktown, the French possessions
in the Caribbean. And there is a problem of financing. This is what I
wanted to tell you because it is still a problem.
curious. Roger Boe, who was one of the generals, sends an urgent
request from Grasse because
needs 25 warships and 3,000 soldiers, and to pay for this it needs 25
warships and 3,000 soldiers.
1,200,000 pounds no less.
That vedra who goes to Havana to get money for de Grasse and after
complex negotiations for
get it, this gives a story, come back with a million pesos. I can't
make the comparison
but as the historian Marta Gutiérrez Steinbach, sorry, Steinbach,
tells us very well, in Spain
in the Ausgalvez and the American Revolution, a very important
research in 2016,
not only Bernardo but also José de Galvez, that is to say, the Galvez
family, was important for the
funds from Mexico and Cuba defraying all the expenses of the battle of
Yorktown and guaranteeing the victory. It is therefore a mistake to think, let's believe, that Spain
was left out in the last battle.
decisive action against the English. Without those funds and without the
Spanish navy distracting
the British with respect to their possessions in the Caribbean,
especially Jamaica, and with the blockade of the
to the port of Yorktown, asking for help to arrive from others farther
away from the English,
final victory would have been impossible. The Saavedra and De Grasse
embark in the following directions
but with the same objective of defeating the English. The redcoats, as
they were called,
surrendered and in 1783 the Peace of Versailles was signed in which Great
Britain, as a power, was left out of the
the Americas. There are many other characters that would make the list
endless, more than 30.
names appear in our electronic biographical dictionary, which you can
consult in the great
hispanic history portal. As you can see, they are exciting biographies
and so striking and
adventurous as those we can find in the discoverers and conquerors of
the 16th century and the
the great hero and principal Bernardo de Galvez, the hero of Pensacola,
of Yorktown, of Saratov before,
left it entirely in the hands and conference of Don Gonzalo Quintero,
since it is the first of all
this fight of excellence and the only one that was recognized somewhat
before the others.
Galvez's early and most effective and decisive cooperation to the cause
of American independence
was always decisive. Winning all of these battles would not have been
possible without the presence and the
decisions of this great strategist, Bernardo de Galvez, with the
opening he made from the beginning.
of a western front that from the beginning until the end of the war was
absolutely as
we have seen a little above, but definitive. One last fact about supplies
because it calls
especially the success of the long clandestine aid of which we spoke
outlined to
through important intermediaries such as all of those mentioned in the
above mentioned in
bold, aggressive and early operations, which of course continue openly
even when
Spain declares war on Great Britain in 1779. I summarize it in the
following sections.
First of all funds, money, loans, some of that I have counted on that
ultimate funding for
the Llorda war. In total the economic historians who have studied
this, in total Carlos
III and Louis XVI provided the rebels with about 30 billion with B,
30 billion dollars a year
today's price. Spain specifically in addition to the one we have seen
of the clandestine network with
and international trading networks, the one I have mentioned, it must
be remembered and this is
important that part of the funds that came to finance the American
Revolution were raised from the
in the form of taxes in the Spanish territories that were still in
Hispanic hands and that today are still in the hands of the are comprised of. Tesas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, Cuba,
Venezuela, Mexico, Costa Rica. In the high
California, each soldier was asked to pay two pesos for a week's pay to
help defray the expenses of
land against England. The effort was enormous. S e c o n d l y , in addition
to all this effort
and soldiers, because the contribution of all these territories,
including the
I mentioned is that they were Hispanic, the conflict was even greater.
It lost a quarter of its population in
the battlefields. Bernardo de Galvez designed a very sharp and
courageous clandestine system,
what we would say, of supplying arms and supplies to the rebels.
For example, a ship
merchant ship sailing northbound on the Mississippi under the Spanish
flag, Spanish crew sailing northbound on the Mississippi under the
Spanish flag, Spanish crew sailing northbound on the Mississippi under
the Spanish flag, Spanish crew
carrying 10,000 pounds of gunpowder, reached the center of the conflicts.
This supply is
undoubtedly was absolutely fundamental for the defeat of the English.
Galvez's assistance
included in this case of the vessel with the 90,000 pounds of gunpowder,
included a loan to the
of approximately $74,000. All of this has naturally been approved in
secret by the
Spanish court. Also the great strategist that Galvez was in 1777, when he
was then governor of
Louisiana at that time, he already organized an army rapidly formed
from Indian Creoles, not very
supporters of course of independence, liberated African-Americans.
Allow me to say a word
about it, although I did not forget at the end. African-American
cedula released, which means that they were
to a 1693 decree of Charles II, our last o s t r e , who had promulgated
in that decree that the
black slaves fleeing the American plantations found refuge in the
United States.
Spanish territories. I will give some details at the end. And
naturally soldiers and military,
thousands of military personnel who fought with and for the Americans.
Not so long ago, allow me to digress,
in 2021, amidst the vandalism of the statues and this self-interested
revival
of the black legend against Spain, an American group of political
representatives,
historians and Spanish delegate advocates placed a motivational plaza in
a park,
in the important park of Brooklyn, for the tribute to the forgotten
Spaniards in battle
It had already been placed in 1976 with the presence of King Juan
Carlos, but the time, in the second year of the
centenary of independence, by the way, but time and vandalism had
the plaque disappeared. This is a tribute to more than 200 Spaniards
who died in the holds of an English ship to defend American
independence,
a prison ship and a tragic and slow death of soldiers who were not
treated as such,
but not as prisoners of war, but as traitors to England, who had
nothing to do with it, in order not to recognize the British, the nation, the United States as a
nation.
We are in 1776, in death, in those prison ships that accumulated in Great
Britain,
accumulated there thousands of prisoners from the battles, mainly
sailors and soldiers,
settlers who supported independence, Dutch, French and Spanish settlers
and even some religious people.
It appears that more than 20,000 people suffered on these ships than
those who
11,500 died
inside, among them our 200 Spaniards. There is a video made by the
Queen's Institution
Sofia and what you can see on the internet about it. And of course I
don't want to forget the weapons,
It is estimated that 90% of the weapons were supplied through this
Spanish channel that I mentioned before,
the ship under Spanish schooner down the Mississippi with bayonets,
cannons, bombs, rifles. But
These supplies included not only ammunition and gunpowder, but also
clothing and medicines,
uniforms, t e n t s , blankets. It is said that the blankets used by the
army of Gen.
Washington were from Spain. Aid, I insist, that was maintained from
the beginning.
to the end. It is true that once the colonies gained their
independence, they ordered
their territories, organized the confederation, federation, etc., and
that over time and with the
interests and political conflicts forgot Spain's help. As we well
know, the condition
The human suffering is complex and contradictory. Spanish troops in
1781 still continued to suffer from the
British power in the campaigns, remember, of Menorca, Gibraltar, The
Bahamas,
Jamaica, Honduras, Nicaragua and other places, with the consequent
loss of lives and resources,
until the peace of Paris of 1783, recovering what we have said before.
But what is already
We commented that they did receive thanks from Washington in every
way. One more note,
the Declaration of Independence and its contradictions. The declaration
we have already commented on for
Thomas Jefferson is one of the most important and influential texts
that has served as the
model in our entire contemporary era. I read some first paragraphs.
We believe that the
The following truths are self-evident. All men are created equal, they
are endowed with
of certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty and the
right to life, liberty and security of person.
the pursuit of truth, of happiness. To ensure these rights, governments
are instituted
among men and derive their just powers from the consent of the governed.
Whenever
any form of government becomes destructive to such ends, it is the
right of the people to alter it.
or abolish it or institute a new one, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. It is
much longer.
Those principles that come from
of the political philosophy of all those mentioned, which is Russian,
and so on. The American reality was, when we see this statement and both the statement of rights
later, it was in a
flagrant contradiction. We are not going to enter into tensions, we
cannot enter into tensions.
in political struggles, e.g., between Jefferson and the democraticminded founding fathers
against the federalists of Hamilton and others, but it is evident that
among the texts of the declaration
of independence and rights was the existence of thousands of slaves in
the countries of the
s o u t h e r n states. Although for the time being it was reached, we are
talking about the years
70s and 80s, it became
to a situation of the 18th century, we have reached a situation that
is consistent but unstable, as we know well.
subsequent history, the problems that arose in the drafting of the
Constitution itself, and more recently in the drafting of the
Constitution.
and the tremendous civil war, as you know, between the North and the
South in the 18th century, and the
all that it has meant in spite of the abolition of slavery after the
terrible war
association. What seems important to me is to contrast the criteria
and the respective
legislation so different between what was still the Hispanic monarchy
in the eighteenth century
and the criteria on slavery that guided American legislation and the
mentality of
British origin that penetrated a good part of the white citizens of North
America. Very
subliminally and knowing that light and shadow, civilization and
barbarism are intermingled in the
history of all, but as an objectified and in no way moralistic sum we
could
a brief o u t l i n e . Remember, in the Spanish dominions in the Americas
during three
centuries there were different stages, but once past the moments of
discovery and the
the conquest, the laws of the Indians and the reaffirmation of the
inviolable rights of the Indians are being
indigenous people as human beings. Integration and miscegenation would be
the hallmark of the Hispanic world,
as Carlos Fuentes, León Portilla, Silvio Zavala used to say, is a
source of pride. There was never
genocide. From Queen Elizabeth to subsequent legislation, marriages were
encouraged.
The equality of all subjects under the crown on both sides of the
Atlantic became clear.
Remember, Father Vitoria, the school of Salamanca, the first time in
the world that a serious debate has taken place
on the law of just titles for appropriation and colonization. The
evangelization of the
different religious orders, which of course contributed to saving the
indigenous languages.
main ones. There were thousands, a village could not lie down with her
n e x t to it, but the most important ones
using as you know the basics of the Latin grammar of Nebrija.
Naturally, there were
abuses or laws were violated, but the possibility always existed
throughout this second part,
the possibility and the fact of judges and legislative proceedings in
favor of individual rights.
It was a polycentric monarchy with several centers. Well, Mexico was
the center of the world,
where the Carrera de Indias and the Manila Galleon arrived. And,
finally, before to finish, before
the incorporation into Galvez's army of African-Americans liberated as
a function of the
of what I told about Charles II. An excellent article by Jordi Cañas of
July 3, 2020.
against the vandalism of the Spanish states in the United States, the
history of the
Fort Mosé in a Spanish settlement founded in 1738 by the governor of
Florida Manuel de
Montiano. Another name worth remembering. There used to be a history
of defending the slaves.
that I will not entertain you, but certainly in 1738 in his Montiano
territory he decreed freedom
of all the slaves and to consolidate it, he ordered the establishment of
a fort near San Agustín.
Remember that St. Augustine is the oldest city in the Americas,
founded in 1575 by Pedro Menente de
Avila. A fort where the escaped slaves could live as free people. That
was the
the beginning of Fort Moses, the first town, says this historian of
free African-American men.
and women in the territories of today's United States. In other words,
the difference with the
British and Americans is evident for better or worse as they think
about the justification for the
Yolock's doctrine on land appropriation which is doctrine and English
with utilitarian justification.
and economic growth of greater productivity and wealth. The exclusion of
the Indians has been evident in
its history, we already k n o w it, let's not remember, we don't need
to remember your films of the years
1960, confinements or simply extermination. I'll be done in a moment.
Discontentment
of all these stories is dreadful and we Spaniards are bad publicists
of the best.
we have done. I have here a quote from an American, Charles Loomis,
which tells the reason
that we have not done justice to the Spanish explorers is simply that
we have been wrongly
informed. Their story is unparalleled. We love the bravery and
exploration of the Americas by
the Spaniards, which was the greatest, the longest, the most wonderful
series of brave poets that
record history. Well, it's a bit excessive but I think there's a
reaction on the
misrepresentations and falsehoods that both American and Spanish
historians are making.
growing history. Remember the article, for example, by Felipe
Fernández Armisto about the
museum that has been set up in New York full of falsehoods, and many
other historians and
writers who continue with determination and rigor to fight against
what... a title of a book by
Enrique Suéino that seems perfect to me. Believe plausible lies and
exaggerated truths.
It seemed to me a title full of elegance and ilonia. And now a final
thought. Of all the revolutions, of all revolutions the only one that has triumphed is the
American revolution.
All others have failed. Their objectives have not been met and have
cost millions of deaths.
and serious conflicts until a certain equilibrium is reached. The case
of France and other countries
of Europe. In the worst and most frequent case, they become tyrannies or
dictatorships of murderers.
and expropriators. They evict men. Some historians have studied
revolutions such as
the French 1789 and others similar to those in all of them, unlike the
American one,
the leaders or promoters have always lost control. Something that did
not happen as we have said
earlier in the American Revolution. And they have been overtaken, they
say in this a debate that has
very interesting and rational. Have the leaders been overtaken by the
masses?
emperor Napoleon, and so on, manipulated by demagogues or people who are
opportunistic. This did not happen in North America in fact. Perhaps it
happened because there were no masses
desperate because, apart from the historical context, a large
territory was in a desperate situation.
to populate and the nation building that was being done, but it has
also been suggested,
also because those potential desperate masses could have been the
possible subjects of those
of those masses, but who were heavily dominated slaves. Slavery really
is still
historically a contentious issue. The black population was effectively
free after the
civil war in the mid-19th century, but were segregated for almost
another century.
Well, one would think that Trump's populism, the fundamentalism of
current areas of white citizens, the ease and possession of guns and
of use in schools
or population, the decomposition of segregation and the exit of blacks
and not of poverty less
of misery, the formation of black elites different from the
organizations of the years
revolutionaries of the 70's, nothing to do with it, and a certain
mixture of one and the other, the increasing
and regional inequality that we are experiencing, all of which may or
may not lead to mass
where irrationality and vengeance multiply, or the material development
and technological will prevent the formation of those masses or the
dictatorships themselves that are drawn
in different places. We are in our present and it is time to finish.
Thank you very much to all of you
for your attention and courtesy and until next week the foundation
noses. Thank you very much.