Spain and the independence of the United States: The foreign policy of Charles III



Well, good afternoon. As general director of the Ramoneses Foundation, allow me to give you the warmest
welcome and thank
you from the bottom of my heart for your presence en masse today, which congratulates and justifies
us. It also gives me enormous
cause for satisfaction to resume the lecture cycles with the Royal Academy of History. They have already
become a shared,
recurring and highly successful activity that comes from the renewed interest in history and especially in the
history of Spain both inside
and outside its borders.

This is by no means the only aspect of the collaboration of the Ramoneses Foundation with the Royal
Academy of History, as Chano Barrios,
Secretary General, well knows, receiving a special welcome. That this collaboration is complemented
by many other projects, among which
the digitization of the extremely rich archives of the academy stands out, and the close collaboration with
the launch of the history
portal project, a new and innovative project that will allow us to learn about aspects of the history of Spain in
cities and countries
beyond our borders. As you will see, a shared adventure that aspires to enrich and project a history of Spain
that is not always
fully known and valued.

I am referring specifically to the theme of the cycle of conferences on Spain and the independence of the
United States, the protagonists, which
brilliantly as always was inaugurated last week at the headquarters of the academy with the conference on
Spain and the independence of the
United States that Mrs. Carmen Iglesias taught with her particular depth and salaciousness.

This is undoubtedly a topic about which not enough is known and with which with this cycle we intend to
contribute to point out the important role
that Spain played in the independence of the United States. Even in that country I have the impression
that this important contribution of Spain to
this process of North American independence is not sufficiently known.

We are even thinking
about how we can export this cycle of conferences to the United States to project and merge it in that country.
Today's conference entitled Carlos
Cercero's foreign policy, which will be edited by Professor Ribot, will be followed on April 25 by the conference
on the independence of the
United States and Spain in a military scenario that will be given by the academic and collaborator of this
foundation, don Hugo O'Donnell. By
the way, it will be at the academy headquarters so that there are no mistakes. Finally, the cycle will end at
the headquarters of this
foundation next Tuesday, May 9, with the conference entitled In the tencheras of the Galvez, Saavedra and
Izpereta empire, which will
be given by Mr. Gonzalo Quintero Sarabia, writer, historian and

Machine Translated by Google

diplomat, and also a very good friend whom I greet today. Today's conference, as has been said, will be given
by Ribot, academic of the Royal
Academy of History, professor of Modern History at UNED since 2005, National History Prize of
Spain 2003 for the book La
Monarquía España y la Guerra de Messina. In 2021, the Ramareces Foundation and the Spanish Military
History Commission, with the
collaboration of the Royal Academy of History, organized a series of conferences that aimed to give new
impetus to the dissemination
of the Spanish military history collection. . In this cycle, Luis Ribot, an academic from the RAC, produced
the conference entitled The Spanish
Army of the 16th and 17th Centuries. Dear Luis, today you play at home. Thank you so much.

Good afternoon. Many thanks to Mr. Raimundo Pérez Hernández, director of the Ramon Ramareces Foundation.
Thank you very much for
your welcome. I truly feel at home. Thanks also to those who have organized this cycle, to the director of the
Royal Academy of
History and also to fellow academics and, of course, colleagues, and of course to all the people who have
been interested in coming to listen to
me. Certainly this is an interesting topic that connects the foreign policy of Carlos III with the...

I don't know where I have to direct this to happen now. It connects with the problem that we are going to analyze
of the Spanish participation
in the independence of the United States. Well, when Carlos III came to the throne in 1759, of course, a whole
series of things happened
before that we should remember at least to understand what international politics is at this time.

We start with the peace of Utrecht, Rastat, Baden, in the middle of the second half, the second decade of the
18th century, the peace that put an
end to the war of the Spanish succession, peace that established a system of European equilibrium or
balance of powers whose The bases were France
and Austria, two strong and traditionally confronting continental powers, leaving Great Britain as the faithful of
this balance, the external
guarantor from its insular isolation and its dominance of the seas.

A system of this balance of powers or balance of powers that would not be put into practice until the
1930s due to the instability
caused by Austria and Spain, which aspired to rectify some of the provisions of the treaties that ended the
war of succession. The two
major international conflicts that followed, the wars of the Polish and Austrian succession in the 1930s and
1940s respectively, were governed by
this system, the equilibrium system that organized two blocs based on the confrontation between France
and Austria with their respective allies. . In the
War of the Polish Succession, England was sidelined trying to exercise the arbitration role that Utrecht had entrusted to it. Neither did Sweden and the Turkish Empire,
which were France's two traditional
allies in the Baltic and southeastern Europe, participate, but Russia did, a power that was then beginning to
intervene in European politics
and came out with Austria. The war of the Austrian succession, the second of the two conflicts that we are
analyzing, was more
complex since it not only marked the first clash between Great Bethany and France since the war of the
Spanish succession, but also
initiated one of the struggles that were to characterize the international politics of the eighteenth century, the
confrontation between the two, between
England and France, in the colonies on the other side of the Atlantic and in India. In Europe, however, the
great novelty of this war of the Austrian
succession in the 1940s was the overwhelming intervention of Frederick II's Prussia, Prussia Brandenburg,
since the King of Prussia is
also the Duke of Brandenburg. This Prussia is the other new participant, besides Russia, in the great Central
European politics of that
century. The contribution of the Prussian army was decisive in tilting the balance on the side of France and its
allies, while England
would end up supporting Austria. The Pádea Quisgrán, in 1748, however, disappointed the expectations of
many of the participants and left
unresolved two major issues that help to understand the subsequent conflicts, the colonial confrontation
between France and Great Britain and the
new rivalry that emerged within the Germanic Empire between Austria and Prussia. On the map you see
the two poles of the confrontation,
France on the one hand, Austria-Hungary on the other, Brandenburg, of course, which is here,
and Prussia, which are still
separated at this moment, of course, Russia and the rest . This division into two blocks is perfectly visible, on
the one hand France, on the
other hand, Austria-Hungary. For Spain, the decades after the Pádea de Utrecht were
positive in international politics. Already in the time of Carlos II, and once the previous hegemony had been lost,
the rulers of Madrid had understood
that the only way to achieve their objectives was to act in coalition or alliance with other powers, beyond the
traditional link
between the two Spanish branches. and Austrian of the Asburgo family. This is what would continue to be
done in the 18th century, with the
particularity that now, with a king of the Bourbon dynasty on the Spanish throne, the natural alliance
was with France, the great
enemy of the previous century, although it is necessary to point out that Spain It was almost always in a
dependent and subsidiary role of
France, with frequent mutual mistrust and also inconsideration on the French part. However, the policy of
alliances and coalitions allowed Spain
to rebuild in the

In the 1930s and 1940s, in those two great wars of succession in Poland and Austria, to reconstruct a
good part of their previous
predominance in Italy, with the fundamental difference that now it was not the King of Spain who
incorporated Italian territories into his domains,
something that none of the European powers would have allowed, but it was the establishment of members
of his dynasty, the younger
sons of Felipe V on the thrones of Naples and Sicily or on those of the duchies of Parma, Piacenza
and Guastalla, in the north of that peninsula.

I don't know how this happened, it's rather more...
Where do I have to... Ah, thank you.
There they have in pink the territories of the sons of Felipe V and their descendants in the kingdoms
of Naples and Sicily and in the duchies of
Parma to the north. The Spanish-French alliance was also beneficial for France, which was also, as has already
been said, the dominant
member of it, since Spain, with its extensive domains, its extensive experience in America and its outstanding
naval capacity, constituted a very
important in its colonial confrontation with England. France's possessions in North America had
already been reduced in Utrecht
due to the cessions it had to make to Great Britain, which heralded that colonial rivalry between the two, to
which we have
referred, and would have to be one more element in favor of the French alliance with Spain. Spain was also
interested in defending its American
domains from British expansionism and eager to recover the territories that it had been forced to cede
to England in the war of succession, the island
of Menorca and Gibraltar. Despite the fact that at times, especially during the reign of Fernando VI, inspired by
pacifism, there was a certain
rapprochement with England, Spain's disputes with it were numerous.

British settlements in Honduras and Nicaragua, maritime
incidents due to disrespect for the flag of Spanish ships, seizure of ships, entry into jurisdictional waters of the
Iberian Peninsula,
privateering protected by the British authorities from the island of Jamaica, commercial interference
in the territories Americans
from Spain, incidents related to the Newfoundland fishing or events such as the aforementioned
possession
of Gibraltar and Menorca made up a large list of reasons for conflict. In the middle of the century, therefore, the
issues that were to determine
international policy during the reign of Carlos III were raised.

Before him, however, there was what some authors have considered a true diplomatic revolution,
as a consequence of a great change
in alliances that brought closer, on the one hand, the eternal enemies, France and Austria, and on the other,
Great Britain. Britain and Prussia, linked until then with France. The rise of Prussia to Brandenburg on the international board substantially altered
the balance of powers established in
Utrecht, since the emergence of a competitor of Austria in northeastern Europe changed the terms of the
alleged balance, which led Maria Theresa
of Austria to reconsider their alliances and get closer to France, with the primary objective of recovering Silesia,
which had lost to Prussia in the recent
war.

As such a major change of alliances began to take shape in Europe, the conflictive relations between
France and Great Britain in the colonial
world led to war. There had already been clashes between them in previous years, both in North America and
in India.

On the other side of the Atlantic, the conflicts led to the declaration of war by France in January 1756, after failing
to return the numerous
naval prizes carried out by the British. A few days later, in Europe, Frederick II of Prussia withdrew
from the French alliance and signed
the Treaty of Westminster with England, whereby both mutually guaranteed their domains on the continent. It
was a commitment designed, above
all, to protect the respective positions of Silesia and Hanover in case they were attacked, that is, a defensive
commitment, from
which it also excluded the maritime war that had just been declared between France and Great Britain. The
alliance between Great Britain
and Prussia, which went beyond the support it had given to the British Jacobites, that is, the supporters of the
deposed Stuart dynasty,
outraged France and precipitated the change of alliances that ended the traditional Frankish confrontation.
-Austrian. Prussia's defection was especially painful,
because France had hitherto relied on it and defended its interests in the recent peace of Ackersgram in 1748,
despite Frederick II's changing
wartime policies.

The rapprochement was formalized in the first Versailles treaty of May 1756, which was a defensive pact in case
of aggression from Great Britain
or its allies. Fear of Prussia also led Russia to join France and Austria, with which it formed a triple alliance. We
see, therefore, in this reversal of
alliances, how the previous France-Austria rivalry disappears, now there is a France-Austria alliance and,
instead, Brandenburg-Prussia, which
had played with France, approaches England and now constitutes this triple Kingdom of France-Austria and Russia
against Brandenburg and Great
Britain. This is the great reversal of alliances of the century, from the mid-16th century. Such important changes
that broke with traditional
alignments had, among other effects, that of stabilizing the situation in Italy, which would barely
change until the French revolutionary wars, but also in the empire and in the Netherlands, theaters for centuries of the
confrontations between Asburg and France.
The alteration of the alliances aroused opposition at both the British and French courts. In London there were
many dissatisfied with the
importance given to this small duchy of Hannover, the duchy from which the new British dynasty came, and
with the cost of defending this small
territory to the north of the Germanic empire. In France, in the same way, the alliance with its traditional
enemy, Vienna, generated
widespread mistrust. The events, however, despite all these reluctances, consolidated the new blocs and led to
war in Europe as a result of a
new initiative by the risky Frederick II of Prussia, who in August 1756 invaded Saxony, King of Poland,
Augustus III, ally of Austria and fatherin-law of the Dauphin of France.

Exactly one year after the previous one,
on May 1, 1757, a second Treaty of Versailles was signed, turning the Franco-Austrian defensive alliance
into an offensive and extending it,
among other countries, to Sweden. For their part, Great Britain and Prussia achieved the support of some
German princes. Once again, an
almost general war was proposed, from which Spain was barely excluded, required by both contenders,
but determined to maintain the neutrality that
presides over the reign of Fernando VI and the united provinces, that is, Holland, allies of England since the
last decades. of the previous century.

Thus began the Seven Years' War between 1756 and 1763, probably the greatest conflict, the
most important conflict of the 18th century, before,
of course, the French Revolution and the conflicts it led to. The Seven Years' War characterized not only by
the full incorporation of the colonies
into European conflicts, to the point that the confrontation began in them, as we have seen, but also by
the fact that both France and Great Britain were
interested in much more the maritime war than the European confrontation. In reality, as Gaston Seller,
one of the great historians of international relations,
affirmed, two different wars developed simultaneously that would end in two different peaces. One between
Frederick II of Prussia and the coalition
of his adversaries, which had East Germany, Silesia or the borders of Bohemia and Poland, and another, second war, between France and England, which was fought
in the seas, the colonies and the western
part of Germany.
In both America and India, the war went in favor of the British. For this reason, and trying to
overcome its disadvantage in
the maritime war, in which its fleet had suffered great losses, France managed to involve Spain, with whose
new king, Carlos III, who had inherited
the throne in 1759, he signed the third family pact in August 1761, a prelude to the Spanish intervention
in the war the following year. It is evident
that the Spanish were not interested in the maritime predominance of Great Britain, with whom, as we have
pointed out, they maintained multiple
disputes in America. But its late entry into the war did not change the dynamics of British triumphs, and it
only served Spain to share the defeat. In a
few moments, moreover, when he joined, in which the war was nearing its end, which would take
place in 1763, due to the fatigue of the various participants. The Treaty of Paris, which put an end to the colonial war, meant for France the virtual disappearance of its presence in Canada,
the so-called New France until then, although it maintained its fishing rights in Terra Nova. It was also forced
to accede to England hitherto
allotted land east of the Mississippi, eastern Louisiana, giving the British wide access to the Gulf of
Mexico. And it also had to cede its factories in
Senegal and India to England, where the French only maintained a few few enclaves. As for Spain, in the
peace of Paris of 1763, it
recovered Havana and Manila, which had been conquered by the British in the last year of the war.

In North America, however, it had to cede Florida to Great Britain, which was a threatening loss by further
increasing the British
presence in the Gulf of Mexico with the consequent threat to Spanish positions in New Spain and the Caribbean.
In compensation, France went to
Spain to West Louisiana on the right bank of the Mississippi, which included the capital New Orleans. It was
a huge territory that
theoretically occupied almost the entire center of the current United States, but in reality, except for the
approximate area of the current state of
Louisiana, it was an uncolonized space and still to be occupied.

The person who negotiated in Paris on behalf of Spain, the Genoese Jerónimo Grimaldi, was rewarded by replacing Ricardo
Woll as Secretary of State for Carlos III.
You see here the territories to which we have referred, the Western Louisiana that passes into Spain,
the Eastern one, all this area that passes into Great Britain, and above all the enormous risk that the British presence in the Gulf of Mexico supposes for Spain, which is where the epicenter of New Spain,
the crown of New Spain, also has the Caribbean islands, Cuba, etc. The outcome of the war in
Europe was more balanced. Although the Peace Treaty ratified the expansion of Prussia, which had been about to succumb during the
conflict, in which it lost 10% of its population and suffered numerous damages.

The confirmation of its importance supposed the emergence of a dangerous bipolarity with
Austria within the empire. A third power, Russia, also had a growing role in the central-eastern space.
In the following years, the conflict in the area was
linked, above all, to the always difficult successions to the elective throne of Poland, a country that would end
up being divided up at the end of
the 18th century among its neighbors, Austria, Prussia and Russia.

The British triumph in the maritime war, which reduced to a minimum the French colonial presence
in America and India, while strengthening the
hegemony of Great Britain in the
seas of the world and its colonial rule, left in the two Bourbon countries, France and Spain, an evident desire for
revenge. The family pact,
which united both in foreign policy, theoretically continued in force, but in some matter such as the Malvinas
incident, in 1770-71, when Great Britain
occupied this territory, Spain did not receive the help from France, despite the family pact, which
increased the misgivings and tensions
that always existed in the relationship between them. Despite its triumph in the Peace of Paris, England
remained isolated for the next
20 years, having broken with Prussia at the end of the war in 1762, as a result of the rapprochement between
Prussia and Russia, which England
did not like. Diplomatic relations on the continent were structured on the maintenance of the alliance between
France and Austria, against
the one established since 1962 between Frederick II's Prussia and Russia. In the three decades that measured
between the peace of
Paris and the beginning of the wars derived from the French Revolution in 1792, a period of time these
three decades that practically coincide with
the reign of Carlos III, most of the tensions and conflicts armed in the old continent took place in Eastern
Europe. The Western powers, financed
depleted by the mid-century wars, concentrated their efforts on colonial competition while losing
importance in the East, especially France,
whose primary diplomatic goal was to maintain Britain's ever-destroying isolation. be an important
achievement, if somewhat incidental
after the defeat in the peace of Paris.

The rebellion of the North American colonies against George III would give France and Spain the great
opportunity to take revenge
on the English, both later joined by the united provinces, and Holland, intervened in support of the colonists with
the addition of a
confrontation Franco-British in India, while the countries of northern Europe responded with the formation of
the so-called League of
Neutrals in 1780, which actually showed the discomfort generated by the English arrogance at sea, that
is, the rest of the countries not they want to know nothing of the conflict. The Spanish participation in the independence of the
United States was very important, as
George Washington himself recognized shortly after.
However, the curious thing is that the recognition of the role of Spain has been very late and very scarce. If
Bernardo de Galvez, who is the
great protagonist on the Spanish side, in 2014 he was posthumously declared an honorary North
American citizen. There has been
some other recognition, but very little. Since the war, the city of Galveston, in Texas, together with Houston,
adopted the name of Galvez in homage to him
and some other element. But if you look at this map, and any map you're looking for of the American
Independent War, look at the legend.
Spain does not appear at all. They are the 13 colonists, the English, the English successes, the Americans, the
Washington
campaign, the American successes, the French and the lines of intervention. Where is Spain? Nowhere. That is,
this is the recognition that Spain has really had due to its participation in the war of independence from the United States.
Unless there is a recent book by a Spaniard that includes a map, it cannot be found
practically anywhere. On the part of Spain, the war against Great Britain in favor of the North American rebels
took place on several fronts.
In the Iberian Peninsula there was a series of unsuccessful sieges of the Rock of Gibraltar and there was a
success, which was the conquest by
the Spanish-French forces of the island of Menorca, ceded to England in Utrecht, conquest in the year 1882. A
second front , somewhat chimerical,
was the attempt to conquer the Isle of Wight, in the south of Great Britain, which nevertheless had the virtue
of retaining part of George III's fleet
in British waters, which obviously prevented him from going to America.

A third front was in Central America, where Matías de Galvez, the father of Bernardo, who was to be the
great Spanish protagonist
of the independence of the United States, attacked the British establishments on the coasts of Honduras and
Guatemala, establishments for the
short of palo tintorio, which was very important for his industry. The fourth and most important of the fronts
took place in the very scene of the
American war of independence.

Fundamentally, from that territory that Spain had received in the peace of Paris, from Louisiana, the
Louisiana that
France ceded to it, with the mouth of the Mississippi, with New Orleans, as the port that was blocked practically
from the beginning and from
there, and also from the Gulf of Mexico, Cuba, etc., the Spanish intervention was organized.

Well, actually, you are going to hear a much more important lecture than mine on the participants, two conferences remain, their military aspects, the Spanish participation and the characters
involved. There are many that
can be searched. One of the first is Luis de Unzaga, who was governor of Louisiana, who since April 1976 gave
refuge to rebel ships pursued
by the British, sent supplies to the colonists' army through the Mississippi and Ohio, which allowed them
to reach practically as far as the
center, the epicenter of the struggle, and after having, then he was captain general of Venezuela and at
the end of the war, as governor of Cuba, as
captain general of Cuba, sorry, he continued to support the army by sending military and material aid.
Much more important, however,
is Bernardo de Galvez, the great character, the most important of all. Look how little he lived, he lived 40 years
and died 13 or 14 years after the end of
the war. He was a very young man when he intervened. He was the nephew of the Secretary of
State, Minister of the Indies in the government
of Carlos III, José de Galvez, and perhaps for this reason he had such an important position, which was that of
Unzaga's successor as governor
of Louisiana. From this position he continued to collaborate in aid of the rebels, with shipments of arms,
ammunition, gunpowder,
medicines, etc., money and other supplies, tents, many, many things, which were important in actions
such as the extremely important Battle of Saratoga
or in the defense of Fort Pitt, present-day Pittsburgh. Galvez also hosted rebels fleeing British troops, all at
a time when Spain was still officially
neutral.

On June 21, 1779, Carlos III declared war against Great Britain, which led Galvez to intervene with
troops and ships to expel the
English from Lower Mississippi, where he achieved important victories, including the dismantling of Fort New
Richmond. in Baton
Rouge, Louisiana, or the capture of eight British ships carrying reinforcements from Pensacola in Florida.
Finally, in the year 80 he attacked
the strongholds of Mobile and Pensacola, which were key points for the British in the Gulf of Mexico.
He managed to conquer Mobile in the year 81 in a
heroic way, with multiple difficulties. In an expedition from Havana, he achieved the reunion of the forts
and the Pensacola square, which
meant practically expelling the British from the Gulf of Mexico, where they had acquired such important
possessions in the Peace of Paris.
And, finally, he participated in other actions.

Another important figure is Diego de Gardoqui, a merchant, a diplomat,
who also intervened by sending money to the rebels and who in 1975 would become Carlos III's diplomatic
representative in the new country,
before the position he would occupy in Spain long ago. Carlos IV, was Secretary of State, that is, Minister
of Treasury in the early 1990s. And, finally, another of the characters, I repeat, there are many more, I have
selected four, would be the Count
of Aranda. This was a decisive character, who was ambassador in Paris during the war years. His
contribution, however, has
not been recognized by the United States because he was traditionally attributed the authorship of a secret
memo that warned
Carlos III of the risks that supporting the rebels had for the American positions in Spain.
Recently, the professor and academic, José Antonio
Scudero, has demonstrated the falsity of such an attribution, indicating the need to repair the historical
injustice committed with
the Count, who very clearly supported the fight of the thirteen colonies against Great Britain. From the beginning
of the insurrection, while in
Paris, he sent financial aid through banks that put the money in North America, he held frequent
meetings with North American agents, Benjamin
Franklin, Silas Deane, Arthur Lee, who incidentally also traveled to Spain. In short, Aranda was clearly in favor
of facing England, contrary to
other characters such as Florida Blanca himself, who in the time line of Fernando VI with José de
Carbajal or Bernardo Woll believed
that it was necessary to go for a policy of good understanding with Great Britain, nonconfrontation, and so on. Aranda
was the complete opposite, hence the injustice committed against him. By the Treaty of Versailles of
1783, which ended the war, France
recovered some colonial positions.

As for Spain, the position of
Menorca was recognized and the so-called two Floridas were returned to it, the eastern one, Florida itself,
lost 20 years earlier in the peace of
Paris, and the western one, which would be called ever since, would receive from then this name of western
Florida, corresponding to that coastal
strip to the south, that coastal strip that links New Orleans with the other Florida, which is
somewhat corresponding to the Pensacola
area, territory that had already been conquered by Galvez's expeditions . With which, I repeat, it was once
again possible to close the
Gulf of Mexico to the British, that the entire Gulf of Mexico was practically under Spanish sovereignty,
maybe some of the islands is
something. Obviously, getting all these territories

It was an important achievement of the Treaty of Versailles, but it implied a sharp increase in expenses,
because such a vast space had to be
defended, fortifications had to be built, equipped with military garrisons, because from very early on, it
is true that there had been eliminated
the British, but very soon there would be a new problem. The United States from the beginning would try to go
south and therefore what had previously
been the British problem would now it was beginning to be the North American problem in the Gulf of Mexico and in the Caribbean. The Treaty of
Versailles also had favorable
repercussions for Spain in Central America, since the English settlements for the Palo
Tintorio felling on the coast of Mosquitos, Honduras
and Nicaragua were eliminated, although England retained Belize and, of course, Gibraltar in Spain, in
addition to Jamaica, the island
of Jamaica was enormously important to her in America. The island of Jamaica, conquered in the midseventeenth century, was a bit like England's
great American base, especially now, once the northern colonies had been lost. Seeking to break its
isolation, Great Britain signed a
commercial treaty with France in 1686, but things were to change very soon. At the end of that
decade, the beginning of the revolution, the
year after the disappearance of Carlos III, would cause a profound change in international relations that, since
the beginning of the 1990s,
have entered that great period of revolutionary Europe. with the wars, later Napoleonic Europe, a whole great
cycle that would only end in
1815 with the Congress of Vienna.

Despite the good results in the territorial aspect, the war of independence of the United States had a high
financial and economic
cost for both France and Spain.
In the first, it aggravated and precipitated some of the crises that would cause the revolution and, among them,
the serious
deterioration of the treasury. For Spain, the financial cost of its support for the new American country
exhausted the treasury coffers,
to the point that already in 1780 the first issue of royal vouchers with the guarantee of the State had to be
appealed. How to write to the teacher
Guillermo Cespedes del Castillo, I quote, the negative balance of that war, between quotes, victorious,
began to be recorded in the years following the
Peace of Versailles, when the price of the conflict is perceived in all its magnitude. Lost ships, ruined
businesses, compensation for
losses, economic paralysis and general crisis, the magnitude of which tends to be masked by the general
situation of depression with which it is
connected.

On the other hand, it is clear that the
example of the thirteen colonies would not fail to influence the emancipation of Spanish America a few
decades later. Another important front
of disputes in international politics during the
Carlos III's regulation was Portugal, a permanent ally of Great Britain and therefore in conflict with Spain at
multiple times, especially on the
occasion of the Spanish claim to the colony of Sacramento in the northern part of the Río de
la Plata, the current zone of Uruguay. Well,
Spain and Portugal always had one in America, the conflict occurs above all in America, because the
Portuguese, look at this map, the
Portuguese, of course, the line of torre de silla,


you see it there marked in yellow, but the Portuguese are spreading through the Amazon and others,
especially through the Amazon basin to
the west, an area that the Spanish are abandoning, but really in the end they will end up getting a much
superior Brazilian territory to which the
chair tower treaty awarded them. But the conflicts were above all in the south, where Portugal establishes this
colony of Sacramento in
the north of the Río de la Plata, in what is now Uruguay, and where the expansion affects areas where

there are the indigenous peoples of the Jesuit missions. These are the two great elements of conflict. In the year
1762, as a consequence
of Spain's late intervention in the Seven Years' War, the Spanish army invaded Portugal in the Iberian Peninsula,
but above all it occupied the
colony of Sacramento, which was a permanent claim. Peace is reached, the colony is returned and passes
back to Portugal. Carlos III
later wanted to reorganize and reinforce Spanish power in South America and for this, in
the year 76, he created the new viceroyalty of the
Río de la Plata. And taking advantage of the new Portuguese attack in the conflict zone,
coinciding with the war of independence from the
United States, the new viceroy of La Plata, Pedro de Ceballos, conquered the colony of Sacramento with the
help of troops sent from Spain.

It also seized some other Portuguese territory in the Brazilian zone. In the end, the agreements of
San Eldefonso and El Pardo were reached
in the year 77, for which a series of limits were established around the Uruguay River. The colony of
Sacramento passed into the hands
of Spain now definitively. Spain ceded some territories in the area of Brazil, in the area of Rio Grande do Sul, the
island of Santa Catalina, etc.,
and in exchange Portugal handed over to Spain the islands of Fernando Po and Anobón, which will sound
familiar to many of you in the future. Gulf
of Guinea because it is the origin of Spanish Guinea, which will later begin to be occupied in the 19th century.

Until then nobody remembered
them, but since 1777 it belonged to Spain.
Obviously, when talking about foreign policy,
we should also talk about the Mediterranean, because we have been talking about the Atlantic, we have
been talking about America, we have been
talking about Europe. What happens in the Mediterranean?
It is curious because really, as I have pointed out before, since that diplomatic revolution of the 50s, the
Mediterranean has practically
remained, the status quo has been maintained. In other words, the Mediterranean problems that have
always affected Spain
disappear or are reduced to a minimum now thanks to this neutralization of the Mediterranean. The
Bourbons have managed to
establish themselves on the thrones of Naples and Sicily and also on the duchies of Parma, Piacenza
and


Guastalla and certainly the Mediterranean no longer fit into all these great combinations. There is a
relative absence of the Mediterranean, but
there is still a problem, which is the problem of relations with North Africa, with Muslim sovereignties. The
problem of the relationship with
Morocco, which led to a series of clashes with Moroccan attempts to take Melilla, Ceuta and the Peñón
de los Veles. In the end, in the year
1780, an agreement was reached that Florida Blanca later increased, that is, it expanded later in the
year 85 and that in some
way made it easier for Spain, well, a little bit, the policy in Mediterranean waters close to the peninsula.
and above all in the face of the
attacks that were made at the time of the independence war in the United States with the attempt to conquer
Gibraltar. There were also bad relations with
Algiers, with clashes, a failed attempt in the year 1775 to conquer Algiers. In short, also complex relations with
Tunisia, with Tripoli and
really with whom he had the best relations, was with the Turkish Empire, at the other extreme, in the
eastern part of the Mediterranean. The
Turkish Empire in 18 exploded in a certain setback threatened by Austria and Russia and, well, in
the year 82 a treaty was
reached that allowed the installation of Spanish consulates in several of the main Turkish cities. Well, I
would practically end
my review here, yes, but I have to say something very quickly because I don't have time, nothing else. And it is
that
when we talk about foreign policy we must allude to something very important, something that took place at
the beginning of the 70s,
taking advantage of the pause before the Peace of Paris and the beginning of the conflicts during these
years of certain tranquility, which is
the extinction of the Society of Jesus. The extinction of the Jesuits is an action in which Spain played a
decisive role and, obviously, it is a
matter of international politics. It's not just about

After expelling them, they had already been expelled from Spain, as well as from Portugal, from
France, from the territories of
the Bourbons. In the 60s it was about getting the Pope to annul, suppress the company. There is
no time to talk to you, it would take a long
time, about the reasons for anti-Jesuitism, about all this policy, which I will simply tell you is anti-Jesuitism on
the part of many
rulers and also on the part of huge, strong sectors of the Catholic Church , religious orders, bishops, etc.,
who are decidedly against
the Jesuits.

Well, the Jesuits also had their supporters and among these supporters was Pope Benedict XIII,
who also, well, protected them and during the life of
Benedict XIII they had the protection of the Secretary of State, Cardinal Torrigiani. For this reason, when Benedict
XIII dies, the conclave is


very important, let's see who can get pope out. The Spanish participation was very important, the pressures,
the ambassador Manuel de Roda would
have a very active role.
In the end, after multiple
alternatives, the Franciscan Antonio Ganganelli was chosen, who took the name of Clement XIV.
Ganganelli was not one of the most clearly anti-Jesuits, but, well, the voters made sure that in the end it would end.
So, what
Carlos III does is change the ambassador.
Roda was an important character, he had done a good job, but he sent José Moñino directly as ambassador to
Rome. And José Moñino is going to a
character of enormous capacity and importance, he is going to be the ambassador who, coinciding with the
pontificate of Clement XIV, insists
and gets, finally gets, after four years of pontificate, the Pope da Larga gets the brief, in 1773, the brief Dominus
Redemptor, which decreed
the suppression of the Company.

Curiously, the Jesuits who had been expelled had to go where they were admitted.
and it was two non-Catholic sovereigns who protected them, the Protestant Frederick II of Prussia
and the Orthodox Catherine II of Russia. The
Society of Jesus would not be reestablished until 1814 by Pope Pius VII. Well, it's time to wrap up
everything we've seen. First, it is convenient to
synthesize the essential lines of Carlos III's foreign policy to which we have already referred. All
foreign policy is part of the chronological period
initiated by the Peace of Aquisirán in 1748, which closed the long cycle of succession wars of the first half of
the century, a chronological period that
began then and extended until the French Revolution. origin of great changes in international relations. A
period of four decades in which
Spain benefited from the stability in Italy, once the presence of Bourbon dynasties was consolidated there and
the consequent neutralization of the
Western Mediterranean, a space whose coasts were mostly in the hands of sovereigns from the Bourbon family and in which the only problem had to be those
relations with the Islamic
powers of North Africa to which we have referred. The neutralization of the Western Mediterranean implied
a sharp reduction in Spain's
interest in European affairs, since, unlike previous centuries, it did not have territories such as Milan or the
Netherlands that forced it to interfere
in as many issues and conflicts as could affect the center and north. of Europe. This allowed him, in turn,
to concentrate his foreign policy on the
defense and reinforcement of his vast overseas empire, especially in America, which was the space most
threatened by Great Britain's
mercantile and maritime power.

In fact, that of Carlos III was the first reign of the Modern Age in which the center of the Spanish action was not in Europe but in the Indies, of foreign action.
Lacking the necessary power to set its own policy, Spain needed to integrate into alliances and the
great problem that arose during
these years was that of what was the best way to defend its empire, the rapprochement, peace and good
relationship with England. or the
alliance with France and the confrontation with the British. In the reign of Carlos III and unlike the previous one
of Fernando VI, the second option was
imposed despite the inclination towards a policy of rapprochement of rulers such as Moñino, Moñino
who, precisely because of his intervention
in the extinction of the Society of Jesus, would achieve Carlos III the title of Count of Florida
Blanca. The link to France in foreign policy
included a certain dependency and subsidiarity, however the results were quite good and Spain managed to
defend, extend and strengthen its overseas
empire, which experienced one of its best moments. In the weakness of Spanish foreign policy, however,
it is convenient to put together with the
suppression of the Society of Jesus the consolidation of the setback against Portugal in South
America, the Amazon area, which, although it
came from earlier times, confirmed now and that he could not alleviate obtaining the long-awaited colony
of Sacramento, but the most negative element
was the notable financial crisis with which the reign ended as a consequence, above all, of the
expenses caused by the participation in the
war of independence of the The United States, a crisis that we must not forget, would condition
the reign of Carlos IV, which would also be deeply
affected by the repercussions of the French revolution.

So there are lights and some shadows, although perhaps in those times and without the perspective that
knowing what happened next gives us,
the lights predominated over the shadows. In any case, it is evident that the Spain of Carlos III was one of
the great world powers of those
years. Thank you so much.

