Antonio Barceló y Pont de Terra
Barceló y Pont de la Terra, Antonio. Palma de Mallorca (Balearic Islands), 29.XII.1717 - 30.I.1797. Corsair and sailor.

Son of Onofre Barceló and his second wife, Francina Pont de la Terra, he descended from a family of Provençal origin from Tarragona. From a very young age he dedicated himself to the life of the sea, under the supervision of his father, who was the skipper of a xebec and concessionaire of the maritime mail service between Barcelona and Palma, learning navigation and piloting in this type of local ships that dangerously exercised trade always under the threat of the Barbary corsairs. When he was eighteen years old, he was appointed skipper of the aforementioned "jabeque-correo", succeeding his father in this same route that was covered twice a month (June 17, 1735), also obtaining the title of pilot. He soon stood out for his skill, bravery and mastery of maritime combat, which gave him several resounding successes. As a consequence of the one he sustained against two Algerian galleots, in defense of two military detachments that he was carrying as transport, he was graduated as ensign of frigate, but without salary (November 6, 1738); action of which there is a praiseworthy oil painting by Angel Cortellini in the Naval Museum of Madrid.

On the occasion of the local scandal caused by the kidnapping and escape in a French ship of a nun from the Misericordia convent, Barceló received from the authorities the task of reaching the fugitive vessel and apprehending the fugitives, which he achieved not without risking his own life, since the captain of the captured ship fired a shot at him that one of his sailors managed to deflect.

Faced with the shortage of grain that Mallorca was suffering, aggravated by the difficulty of ships arriving due to the continuous storms that battered the Balearic coasts in 1748, Barceló was the only skipper who, commissioned by the captain general, took the risk of bringing the grain from Barcelona to the Balearic Islands, took the risk of bringing from Barcelona the wheat, bread and white sponge cake that managed to avoid rationing, for which the beneficiaries requested a reward from Ferdinand VI, which resulted in his promotion to the rank, also honorary, of lieutenant of frigate (May 4, 1748).

Due to the increase in Algerian attacks, that same year four xebecs were ordered to be armed in privateering in Palma under especially attractive conditions. The arming and the expenses of maintenance and wages of the crews were to be paid by the State, and they were also to be granted the total amount of the preys they made (September 3, 1748). Barceló responded to this call with his xebec Santo Cristo de Santa Cruz, becoming the leader of the entire flotilla, which was disbanded in October of the following year, but Barceló managed to charter his ship on behalf of the Royal Navy for the mail service, which included the supply and relief of the military garrisons.

In 1753 a daring Algerian galleot managed to capture a merchant ship at the very entrance of the port of Palma. Barceló and another skipper, Benito Capo, set off in pursuit of her, managing to capture her and recover the prey, which earned him the rank of lieutenant of navy (August 4, 1753). In the summer of 1756, while sailing at the mouth of the Llobregat, he was pursued by two Moorish galleots, which he confronted, making one of them flee and boarding and capturing the second, receiving two wounds. This last action determined his definitive incorporation into the General Corps of the Navy, occupying the position of lieutenant of navy (30 June 1756). Assigned to the department of Cartagena, he continued in command of the mail xebec Mallorca and shortly afterwards he obtained the command of the war xebecs Catalán and Cuervo Marino with which he captured prey in June 1762 which, as on other occasions, facilitated his next promotion to frigate captain (29 June 1762). The Government placed under his command a flotilla of four newly built xebecs, based in Cartagena, with which he achieved that same year the feat of capturing as many Moors on the Catalan coast, and only with the one he was riding, he captured another shortly after (August 30, 1762). At the end of the year, with his insignia on the Garzota, he was commissioned to guard the coast of Malaga in command of five xebecs and two galleots, and the following year Barceló recruited a large number of seamen in his native islands for the Carthaginian flotilla, which already numbered seven ships, He achieved one of his most celebrated successes when he surrendered the ship of the famous Algerian captain Selim after a fierce boarding, taking him prisoner, but at the cost of receiving a bullet in his left cheek, which would scar him for life.

At the beginning of 1764, he commanded another new generation xebec, the Atrevido, which was one of his favorites and in which he carried out some reforms in the rigging, proposing to his hierarchical superiors the continuation of the corsair in the winter time of the year in which the ships destined to this mission used to remain unarmed in port, and he obtained authorization to carry it out with the Atrevido and the mail from Mallorca, the San Antonio, for whose command his brother José Barceló had been appointed skipper at his request, until he again assumed the general command of the Cartagena xebecs in the spring. José Barceló continued to render his services to the Crown for a decade and both brothers had an encounter with several other enemies off the coast of Alicante in which they managed to rescue a considerable number of captives (January 21, 1766), who dedicated an ex-voto panel to Our Lady of Montserrat that is preserved in the Maritime Museum of the Atarazanas in Barcelona. Four days later they seized two penguins and deposited them in the port of Malaga. Antonio Barceló therefore simultaneously commanded squadrons and single ships, often using the tactic of taking another ship "in preserves" alongside his own, to facilitate the seizures and mutual support.

Barceló's gift of command and proverbial skill made his courageous and disciplined crews very fond of him, including the sailors with whom vacancies were filled and the prisoners forcibly embarked, as was also demonstrated in 1766 when the King pardoned the latter for their good behavior. After carrying out numerous other war actions and having been commissioned to transport the expelled Jesuits with her flotilla from Cartagena to the Papal States in the summer of 1767, the following year she succeeded in capturing one of the best armed xebecs in Algiers, the Caballo Blanco, off the Rock of Vélez de la Gomera, which, being an excellent ship, passed into the service of the Navy and years later exchanged for the mail that Antonio Barceló had built at his own expense, giving him command of the thirty-two-gun Lebrel.

On his return to his base in Cartagena at the beginning of 1769, he was given broad powers to organize the contracorso in the way he considered most convenient, and in view of the enormous fame that his figure had acquired inside and outside his sphere, the Secretary of the Navy, Arriaga, ordered that the list of prey captured by the frigate captain Barceló during the seven years in which he had enjoyed this employment (1762-1769) be sent to him, It was calculated that in that period he had sunk or captured nineteen Moorish ships, delivering more than a thousand prisoners among Algerians, Moroccans and Turks, as forced to the King's arsenals, freeing as many other Christian captives who were imprisoned on board or later exchanged in Algiers.

Barceló was promoted to captain (March 20, 1769) and continued to serve with the entire squadron or with only two of his ships, protecting the Catalan, Levantine and Malaga coasts and communications with the African presidios, even damming Neapolitan ships that, despite being declared "good prey" by the Spanish courts, had to be returned for diplomatic reasons.

In the autumn of 1774 his health suffered, so he requested and obtained a leave of absence to convalesce in Mallorca, where he was surprised to be promoted to a pre-existing rank in the Army, but newly created in the Navy, that of brigadier (22 January 1775), later returning to service in Cartagena. In 1775 he was especially active. He participated in the relief of Alhucemas and Melilla, attacked by the Sultan of Morocco, in command of the coast guard, which bombarded the enemy camp until both encirclements were lifted. In the frustrated Algiers operation that same year, as commander of the convoys and xebecs, the fire support of his ships allowed the difficult reembarkation once the attack failed. For this expedition he had donated to the King his twelve-gun galleoncete El Carmen, also paying for its maintenance throughout the campaign.

On his return to Spain, the Secretary of the Navy, the Marquis of Gonzalez de Castejon, commissioned him to convoy the merchant ships bound for the Indies in their first stage from the Mediterranean ports.

Promoted to squadron commander (April 24, 1779), three months later he was appointed commander of the naval forces destined to the blockade of Gibraltar as a consequence of the war (1779-1783) against England. Having established his plan of attack and considering the fire support to be scarce, he ordered the construction under his direction of various types of iron-plated armored boats, of sufficiently strong construction to carry a large caliber cannon, which would constitute the precedent of our subtle navy of the 19th century. The tactical use of these vessels and their combination with other means, explained by Barceló in September 1783, constitutes the first doctrine on the subject. To the forty initial gunboats that were built in the Palmones River, another twenty obuseras were added to beat the enemy defenses with curved shot and five double-deck floating batteries, whose construction was entrusted to the Frenchman d'Arçon. When the attack by sea on the square failed (September 13, 1782) and the English had managed to bring in supplies and reinforcements, Barceló continued to beat the enemy bastions day and night with his gunboats until the cessation of hostilities, being wounded two more times.

His gunboats and bombardiers were again used in the bombardments of Algiers in 1783 and 1784, entrusted to Antonio Barceló, already named lieutenant general (February 16, 1783), as chief of both squadrons which, departing from Cartagena, effectively fulfilled their punitive task. Between one action and the other, Barceló, after disembarking from his flagship, the Terrible, was summoned to the Court, where the King granted him the salary of lieutenant general for life (September 26, 1783), for the merits contracted in the first bombardment. The second punitive expedition, which sailed from Cartagena in July 1784, was larger: one hundred and thirty ships of all types were assembled, to which were added the squadrons of Naples and the Order of Malta, all under the command of Barceló, who placed his insignia on board the ship Rayo. The damage inflicted on the city was great, but the greatest of all was the loss of a good part of the Algerian corsair fleet, which would never recover its former strength. Once again, Antonio Barceló almost lost his life when the falua from which he was directing the operations sank, but his major general, José Lorenzo de Goicoechea, saved him.

Back in Cartagena, he obtained permission to go to rest in Palma while he was not given a destination, being conferred there the command of general commander of the naval forces destined to the privateering in the Balearic Islands and coasts of Barbary, with the mercy of enjoying embarkation allowances although he remained on land (September 27, 1784), being decorated with the order of Carlos III.

The last of the services rendered by Barceló was the enlistment of the squadron ready in Algeciras for the bombardment of Tangier in 1792, which was suspended due to the death of the Sultan of Morocco and the new prospects of peace. After the operations ended in June of that year, he was ordered to retire to Mallorca, where he died. His remains rest under the pavement of his family chapel dedicated to Saint Anthony, in the church of Santa Cruz in Palma, and a simple cenotaph commemorates him in the Pantheon of Illustrious Sailors in San Fernando (Cadiz).

Barceló's genius as a sailor was fully recognized in his time, but his integration into the basic scale of the Navy and later his promotion to generalship aroused some suspicions of those who considered it essential to have a complex training that Barceló lacked. The Count of Fernán-Núñez, former captain general of the galleys of Spain, which Barceló's xebecs came to replace, headed the list of those aggrieved by his promotions: "Barceló, although an excellent privateer, does not have, nor can he have because of his education, the qualities of a general".

For the people he was a true idol, leaving for posterity the apothegm of "being braver than Barceló on the sea". Brave, self-sacrificing and audacious, he was the ideal man for the missions entrusted to him where others with more studies failed and which justified the confidence placed in him by Secretary of the Navy Arriaga. In his time, a couplet was printed anonymously in which inevitably veiled comparisons were made: "Barceló is not a writer, / nor does he pretend to be a saintly man, / nor does he look like a partridge, / nor does he wear external pomp: / he persuades and is not an orator, / his grooming is not presumptuous; / he goes as he should be dressed, / he trusts little in his speech, / but if he gets to fight, / he will always be what he has been".

In memory of the exploits of Antonio Barceló, who was known in his homeland as "es capitá en Toni", several warships of different types have appeared with his name in the lists of the Spanish Navy.