Bernardo de Gálvez

Son of Matías de Gálvez, Lieutenant General and Viceroy of New Spain; nephew of José de Gálvez, Marquis of Sonora, Visitor of New Spain, Universal Minister of the Indies and Councilor of State under the reign of Carlos III.

Bernardo de Gálvez, following his father's example, chose the profession of arms at a very young age. In 1762, as a volunteer and with the rank of Infantry Lieutenant, he took part in the war against Portugal, an ally of Great Britain. Spain had entered late in the conflict -whose final results would be disastrous-, by virtue of its alliance with France, after signing the Family Pact between Charles III and Louis XV a year before, to counteract the English power in Europe and America. In 1763, the Peace of Paris put an end to the so-called Seven Years' War. Among other provisions, Spain ceded Florida and the lands east of the Mississippi River to Great Britain; in turn, France ceded Louisiana to Spain. The damage caused to Spain by the loss of Florida was incalculable, since it gave to its antagonist some posts in the Gulf of Mexico which, due to their strategic importance, constituted a constant threat to the security of the viceroyalty of New Spain, as well as to the commerce and the transport of goods through those waters.

In 1765, Gálvez was assigned with the rank of captain to the Regimiento Fijo de Infantería de la Corona in the viceroyalty of New Spain, under the command of Juan de Villalba. In October 1770 he was appointed Commander of the Arms of Nueva Vizcaya, stationed in San Felipe el Real de Chihuahua, where he distinguished himself in the numerous battles against the Apache Indians. He returned to Spain in 1772 and was assigned to the Regiment of Cantabria, in Pau (France), where he was to serve for three years. Learning French would be of great help to him for his later assignment in Louisiana. In 1775, upon his return from France, he joined the Seville Infantry Regiment. With the rank of captain, he participated in the disastrous expedition to Algiers, under the command of Alexander O'Reilly.

He was seriously wounded but resisted with the Company of Hunters under his command until the operation entrusted to him was completed.

As a reward, he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and assigned to the Military Academy of Avila.

But it would be in America, in the context of the warlike confrontation between the first world powers, where his victorious deeds of arms and his outstanding services to the Crown would take place. On May 22, 1776 he was appointed colonel of the Louisiana Fixed Regiment, stationed in New Orleans, and on July 19, interim governor of the province of Louisiana, governed since 1770 by Luis de Unzaga y Amézaga.

Since he took office as governor, on January 1, 1777, Gálvez deployed an intense activity aimed at counteracting the British threat in the Spanish dominions, at the same time he gave a decisive, early and very efficient cooperation to the cause of the North American independence. Among other contributions, he sent numerous shipments up the Mississippi with arms, ammunition, blankets and medicines destined for the armies of independence, which he helped in such decisive battles as that of Saratoga, in that same year. It gave asylum to numerous American colonists who were fleeing from the British troops and thus began an enormous task that would make it one of the greatest and most effective allies of the United States in its war of independence. The Spanish contribution would be decisive in deciding the conflict, as proclaimed repeatedly before the world by General George Washington himself.

In spite of remaining officially neutral, the Spanish Government was already on its way, although with well-founded and serious reservations and hesitations, to war against Great Britain. The Count of Floridablanca wrote to the Spanish Ambassador in Paris, Count of Aranda, in December 1777: "Great sagacity is necessary in order not to hallucinate ourselves nor put us on the edge of the precipice of an immature war, from which any fatal blow must fall on Spain, which has the most to lose in its present circumstances". Gálvez perfected a supply system to covertly provide the American troops with supplies that were urgently and repeatedly requested, among others, by General Lee, chief of the Southern armies, Patrick Henry, governor of Virginia, and George Morgan, who was securing the defense of Ford Pitt (where the city of Pittsburgh stands today).

A ship loaded with ten thousand pounds of gunpowder was chartered in New Orleans and sailed upriver with a Spanish flag and crew, managing to avoid the vigilance of the English posts established on the banks of the Mississippi, and advanced through the waters of the Ohio until it reached Fort Pitt. The arrival of gunpowder would make possible the English defeat in the campaigns of this region.


Gálvez's collaboration with the financier of Irish origin Oliver Pollock, settled in New Orleans, who had embraced the cause of the Americans and soon would be the official agent of the Congress of Philadelphia in that city, meant a decisive support for the independence armies. In 1777, among other aid, Gálvez lent 74,000 dollars to the Americans and sent a shipment of supplies worth 25,000 doubloons down the Mississippi, until reaching the frontiers of Pennsylvania and Virginia, from where they were distributed among General Washington's army and the southern divisions, under General Lee's command.

Spanish aid -powder, blankets, rifles, quinine, ammunition- allowed the American colonists at war with their metropolis to maintain control in the territories west of the Alleghany Mountains.

Gálvez encouraged colonization and established new immigrant populations in the vast territories of Louisiana. Numerous Canary Islanders settled in the area of Tierra de Bueyes, southeast of New Orleans, the original nucleus of today's colony of St. Bernard Islanders, which has jealously preserved its Spanish heritage and the use of Castilian Spanish.

Galvez also founded the towns of Barataria, New Iberia and Galveztown, named in his honor.

At the time of this colonization process, the young governor lent fundamental help to the campaigns of the American George Rogers Clark in Illinois; the situation of the independence fighters was extremely compromised in this region of the upper Mississippi Valley.

Gálvez also fostered relations with the numerous Indian "nations" - Chicasás, Chactás, Crics, Alibamones, among others - and, in order to attract them to the cause of Spain, he pursued with them a skillful policy of recruitment, traffic and gifts, infrequent in the rest of Spanish America.

In 1779, Galvez was promoted to Brigadier and appointed Governor of Louisiana. According to secret reports, the English were preparing to invade the province and attack New Orleans. Gálvez ordered the reinforcement of his defenses. On June 21, the formal declaration of war by King Charles III to the King of Great Britain took place. Gálvez decided to take the offensive and surprise the English in their posts and fortifications, without waiting for reinforcements from Havana, the Captaincy General on which Louisiana depended. The orders from Spain specified: "All efforts must be directed to throw the English arms out of Pensacola, the Mobila and other posts they occupy on the Mississippi River".

On August 18, when preparations for the expedition were being finalized, a terrible hurricane hit New Orleans, destroying a great number of houses and sinking the ships that were on the river, armed and ready for the campaign. But Galvez managed to keep up the spirit of the troops and after managing to recover some boats and artillery from the bottom of the river, he set out to take by surprise the English posts on the lower Mississippi.

On September 7, 1779, after eleven days of arduous marching, the expeditionary forces under the command of Gálvez conquered by surprise and assault Fort Bute de Manchak and took its garrison prisoner, without any casualties. Two weeks later, the Spanish artillery succeeded in dismantling Fort New Richmond in Baton Rouge.

Galvez obtained its unconditional surrender, as well as that of Fort Panmure at Natchez and the posts on the Amite River and Thomson's Creek. Eight British ships carrying reinforcements from Pensacola to these posts were also captured.

With these fulminating victories, not only the lower basin of the Mississippi, but the whole immense valley was dominated: the British abandoned their plans to attack from Canada, as well as from Pensacola, the Spanish possessions. For the merits contracted in the enterprise, Gálvez -who was thirty-three years old- was promoted to field marshal.

In 1780, Gálvez directed the military operations against the strongholds of Mobila and Pensacola, keys to the British dominion in the Gulf of Mexico. On January 14, he undertook the conquest of Mobila, as the first objective to drive the British out of West Florida. In New Orleans he set sail with about eight hundred men of veteran troops and militia, in twelve ships of different sizes. Calms and squalls made the crossing difficult; it was not until February 10 that they were able to enter Mobila Bay, where new calamities befell the fleet: several ships ran aground and others were shipwrecked in the midst of a storm that prevented their rescue.


Gálvez, "creating the need for new forces", as he said, reorganized the troops that were able to disembark and, using eight cannons salvaged from the frigate El Volante, ordered the establishment of a battery at the tip of Mobila, in order to dominate the entrance to the bay. He then mobilized his troops towards Fort Charlotte, which defended the square, and on February 25 took up positions less than two kilometers from the enemy to begin preparations for the attack.

The work was hurried, the trenches were opened, the batteries were established. In spite of the continuous enemy fire, Gálvez, with the scarce means at his disposal and with the help of four ships arriving from Havana with five hundred men, managed to open a breach in the British fort, tightening the siege in such a way that on March 14th the square surrendered to the arms of King Charles III. Once this conquest was concluded, Gálvez left Colonel José de Ezpeleta in charge of Mobila and returned to New Orleans, ready to undertake the conquest of Pensacola without delay.

The capture of this stronghold, capital of West Florida and seat of British civil and military power, was Spain's first objective in the conflict, due to its great geopolitical and strategic value. Pensacola posed a constant threat to the security and commerce of Louisiana and the viceroyalty of New Spain, the main source of income for the Crown in the Indies. Gálvez embarked in Havana in command of the expedition against Pensacola on October 16, 1780. Days later, a hurricane of fateful consequences hit the Gulf of Mexico; the ships of the convoy were dispersed: some ended up in Campeche; others in the Mississippi River; one went to the bottom, others disappeared. After overcoming innumerable obstacles and trying to reunite the ships, Galvez returned to the point of departure a month later. In the Cuban capital, after hard-fought discussions with the Board of Generals, of which he was a prominent member, he managed to be granted the necessary maritime and land forces to undertake again such a decisive enterprise.

On February 28, 1781, a new expedition set sail from Havana against Pensacola. The fleet was formed in three columns on a WNW course. To windward advanced the ship San Ramón, which mounted sixty-four cannons, and on board of which the commander-in-chief of the expedition, Bernardo de Gálvez, flew his insignia. The ship was commanded by José Calvo de Irazábal, who had received the order to obey Gálvez's orders regarding the conquest of Pensacola. The fleet was composed of thirty-two ships: besides the aforementioned warship, several frigates, polacras, saetías, sloops, paquebotes, brigs and a schooner, as well as two gunboats. Five companies of grenadiers were embarked on the warships. The number of men in this expedition, 3,179, was less than that of the unsuccessful October expedition. Of these, 1,543 belonged to the land army; the rest came from the crews and crews of the warships and transport ships; all under the command of Gálvez, who had obtained by agreement of the Junta the sole command. This last circumstance was to be decisive for the subsequent course of the conflict.

On March 9, Galvez disembarked at the head of 1,300 men on Santa Rosa Island, east of the entrance to Pensacola Bay. From the opposite shore, the British fort Red Cliffs began the cannonade, without casualties. The following day the camp was set up, as well as a battery of eight cannons to keep the enemy ships away and to protect the entrance of the squadron and the convoy. On the 11th, Gálvez ordered that the maneuver to enter the bay be attempted. The squadron and convoy weighed anchor and the operation began. But the vessel San Ramon hit bottom when going through the entrance channel, close to the bar; therefore, it tacked and returned to the starting point, where it anchored, followed by the other vessels.

Gálvez ordered that the operation be repeated the following day; however, gathered in a meeting, the Navy officers in command of the warships decided that the enterprise was not practicable due to the tortuousness of the channel, the currents and the artillery shots from Fort Red Cliffs, which beat by stern and bow any vessel that dared to enter the channel. The tension between Galvez and the Navy chiefs worsened in the following days. For the time being, the expedition was paralyzed. Waiting for the reinforcements to arrive from New Orleans and Mobila -Colonel Ezpeleta was already marching with his troops to join him-, the position of the army became more and more untenable.

On March 18, Gálvez undertook the riskiest, most deeply meditated war action of his life. He decided that he himself would be the first to force the entrance of the bay, convinced that this last resource could induce the others to follow him.


At two o'clock in the afternoon he embarked alone on the brig Galveztown, and, standing on the fortress, he ordered the insignia of his rank to be hoisted and the fifteen cannon shots of the regulation salute to be fired so that the army, the squadron and the garrison of the enemy fort could not doubt who was embarked.

The Galveztown set sail, followed by two gunboats and a sloop -the only vessels under the exclusive command of the general as governor of Louisiana- and sailed through the entrance channel to the bay. The artillerymen stationed at Fort Red Cliffs opened a hail of fire, forty cannon shots aimed mainly at the brigantine in first place. The bullets pierced sails and rigging, but the Galveztown managed to avoid the danger and entered the bay, followed by the other ships, which were also almost unharmed. From Santa Rosa Island, Galvez's troops cheered the heroic valor, the feat of their general. This unexpected example determined that the following day the entry of the rest of the squadron and the convoy -except for the ship San Ramon- was carried out with the greatest success, in spite of the heavy fire of the strong enemy, who fired close to one hundred and fifty cannon shots, hitting some ships.

Once the expected reinforcements arrived from Mobila and New Orleans, the general moved with his entire army to the mainland. Work began on the attack on the enemy positions. During the long siege of the square -defended by several forts located in a dominant place, garrisoned with more than one hundred cannons-, Gálvez was seriously wounded in the belly and hand, although, overcoming this, he continued directing the most important operations.

On April 19, he received the timely and unexpected help of the squadron commanded by Jose Solano, coming from Havana, with reinforcement troops. This naval support was decisive. On May 9, two months after landing on the island of Santa Rosa, the forts and the plaza of Pensacola surrendered to the forces of King Charles III. Spain thus regained West Florida and there was no British possession left in the Gulf of Mexico.

Shortly after the conquest, Gálvez -who was thirty-five years old- was promoted to lieutenant general and named knight pensioner of the Royal Order of Charles III. The Monarch decreed that Pensacola Bay be named in the future Bahía de Santa María de Gálvez and that in order to perpetuate the heroic action with which Bernardo de Gálvez had forced the entrance of said bay alone, he "put the brigantine Galveztown with the nickname Yo Solo" on his coat of arms. Likewise, he was appointed governor and captain general of Louisiana and West Florida, erected as independent provinces from Cuba, and commander in chief of the Army of Operations in America. In 1783, at the request of the province of Louisiana, the King granted him the title of Count of Gálvez.

After an absence of eight years, Gálvez returned to Spain in 1784. During his stay in Madrid he was frequently called for consultation by the Government: Spain was facing serious political problems in North America as a result of the peace signed with Great Britain in 1783, such as, among others, boundary issues, free navigation on the Mississippi, American immigration into Spanish territory or relations with the Indians. In October, Gálvez was appointed Captain General of Cuba, with command also of Louisiana and the Floridas. His conquests had largely determined that Spain would keep West Florida and that England would cede East Florida to him. Gálvez maintained a close collaboration with Diego de Gardoqui, first Spanish representative before the Government of the United States, as Chargé d'Affaires. According to the orders received, Gardoqui was to abide by Gálvez's advice, establishing a regular mail between them and giving him a copy of the figure used between the Ministry and him. In one of his letters, Gálvez instructed him to remind the American Government of the services rendered by Spain in its struggle for independence "as the only rights they have in the Mississippi, but rights of gratitude towards us and not of usurpation".

Bernardo de Gálvez was appointed viceroy of New Spain in 1785, as successor to his father, Matías de Gálvez, who died in Mexico City. In his new assignment, the viceroy's first objective was to fight against two terrible evils that had plagued the Mexican people since the previous year: the extreme shortage of food throughout the territory, due to the almost total loss of crops, and the plague epidemic that had attacked the population, causing innumerable deaths.

Among other measures, he ordered the isolation of the sick to avoid contagion, the internment and free medication for the poor in hospitals.


In order to help the thousands of Mexicans who had abandoned their homes in the countryside and went to the cities in search of food, Gálvez appointed a permanent board in charge of helping them, counting on the contribution of the first fortunes of the country. On his part, he ordered the reception of as many needy people as could fit in the patios of the viceroyal palace and destined almost half a million pesos of his own patrimony to help them. As a man of the Enlightenment, Gálvez promoted public works; he spread the new vaccine against smallpox; he also dictated several important dispositions for the better government of the provinces of Sonora, California, Nueva Vizcaya, Texas, New Mexico and Coahuila.

The viceroy's character, his talent, his humanity, his kindness and sympathy, as well as his closeness to the problems of the indigenous population, soon earned him great popularity, which he shared with his wife, Felicitas de Saint-Maxent. The praise for the young vicereine was unanimous; Alexander von Humboldt would say of her that she was "as beautiful as she was loved by all", and the historian of Louisiana Charles Gayarré described her as "a lady of outstanding pleasantness and as charitable, gracious and benevolent as she was beautiful". The prestige and power of the Viceroy Count de Galvez were unrivaled in those immense possessions of the Spanish Crown in America. But he had a premature end: a fulminating illness would cut his life short. On November 30, 1786 he died in the Archbishop's Palace of Tacubaya, at the age of forty.

He was buried in Mexico City, in the church of San Fernando. In his will he left heirs to his two children and the one who was about to be born; he recommended his widow to the Minister of the Indies, Marquis de la Sonora, his uncle, and made special emphasis on Felicitas going to live with his children in Spain, where he wanted them to be educated. His loss was greatly felt in both kingdoms. Gálvez left a lasting mark of his mandate by the successes that credited him as an enlightened and liberal ruler. The triumph achieved over Great Britain had been, in turn, the culminating hour of his career in arms. The singularity of his feat would be recognized by Carlos III and proclaimed in all his dominions.

