Felipe de Neve

Neve, Felipe de. Bailén (Jaén), 1724 - Peña Blanca (Mexico), 21.VIII.1784. Governor of the Californias and commander inspector of the Internal Provinces of the north of New Spain.

Of noble family, Felipe Neve entered the Army in March 1744 with the rank of cadet in the Infantry Regiment of Cantabria. Between 1746 and 1749 he served in the Royal Corps Guard. In October 1756 he was promoted to major adjutant. He participated in the invasion of Portugal in 1762 as an officer in the Milan Cavalry Regiment. On September 13, 1764 he was commissioned to move to the viceroyalty of New Spain with the rank of sergeant major, thanks to his brilliant service record. There he served in the Provincial Cavalry Regiment of Querétaro, first under the command of the Marquis of Ruiz and later as head of the Marquis when he was assigned to another service. He tried to enlist natives from the jurisdictions of Querétaro and Celaya for the local militias, due to the serious deterioration of the military situation. In 1767 he was commissioned for the expulsion and administration of the goods of the Jesuits of Zacatecas, remaining in this commission until October 1770. His previous successes and his solvency in the administration of the Jesuit goods earned him the promotion to lieutenant colonel in 1774.

Viceroy Antonio Bucareli appointed him governor of the Californias by mandate of October 28, 1774, replacing Felipe Barry. From Mexico he went in 1775 to the presidio of Loreto to take formal possession of the position in the Californias, where he arrived on March 4. In the instructions he received from Bucareli himself, his main objective was to maintain the settlements of his governorship. To this end, he was entrusted to take care of the militias as the best way to control a territory still to be explored, especially in Alta California. He maintained the capital of the governorship in Loreto until 1777, when he moved it to Monterrey until the end of his term. In the period from 1775 to 1777, Neve dedicated himself fundamentally to repopulate the presidio of Loreto and to found new missions in Baja California, such as San Vicente Ferrer or Santo Tomás. In this missionary expansion he had the support of the Dominicans. Militarily, he was in charge of the defense of these missions, achieving notable success.

The minister José de Gálvez promulgated a decree for the transfer of the capital from Loreto to Monterrey, in Alta California, on August 16, 1775, although it was not until 1777 when Neve, after instruction from the viceroy, left his previous place of residence. The almost simultaneous appointment of Teodoro de Croix as first commander of the Internal Provinces of northern New Spain caused Neve to maintain direct correspondence with him, as his immediate superior. He greatly promoted agriculture in northern California while founding a new presidio, called Santa Barbara. He founded the town, later city, of San José on November 29, 1778, the year in which he also earned the rank of colonel. In 1779 he had to face an Indian insurrection near the mission of San Diego.

Neve elaborated the new Real Reglamento de Presidios dated June 1, 1779 in Monterrey. In 1781, the viceroy ordered it to be printed and put into effect. This regulation fixed the amount of the presidios of San Francisco, Loreto, San Diego and Monterrey, detailed the internal administration of the presidios and the military faculties of its components. During his mandate, three important maritime expeditions were carried out along the coasts of the Californias.

In 1782 he left the position of governor of the Californias to occupy that of inspector commander of the Internal Provinces, and a year later that of general commander of the same provinces in substitution of Croix. At the end of 1783 he was promoted to brigadier. As head of the Internal Provinces, he was especially concerned with their financial support. He tried to establish communication between the territories of Sonora and Sinaloa and the establishments of Alta California, but died in office in August 1784.

Although married, he never had children.