Francisco Saavedra de Sangronis


Born into a prestigious family, he was orphaned when he was only two years old. His mother, María de Sangronis y Licht, remarried to Joaquín Escobar, another personage of ancestry who was able to provide the child with a first-class education. After completing his first studies at the Colegio del Sacromonte (Granada), at the age of seventeen Francisco obtained a doctorate in Theology from the University of Granada, eager to embark on an ecclesiastical career. In 1767 he unsuccessfully competed for the dignity of lector of the Cathedral of Cadiz, which frustrated his aspirations for a time. While passing through Seville, he entered the Academia de Buenas Letras of that city with a speech on the prophecies of Daniel.

He then went to Madrid in search of the coveted ecclesiastical piece. He did not get it, but in the capital of Spain he discovered that his true vocation was the Army. "I put on the uniform, whose premiere was one of the happiest moments of my life," he would confess years later. In 1768 he joined the Immemorial Regiment as a cadet, of which he soon became a second lieutenant. In 1769 he met Count Alejandro O'Reilly, with whom he planned the foundation of a military school in Avila. The project was approved by the Crown in 1773; Saavedra was by then a lieutenant in the Army after having served in Catalonia and Valencia. Along with his military training, Saavedra did not neglect the cultivation of literature and philosophy, either by translating into Spanish several Latin and French works, or by reading, on the sly, forbidden authors such as Montesquieu, Voltaire and the Encyclopedists.

These readings did not make Saavedra an innovator, but rather the classic enlightened reformer who would never dare to question the sovereignty of the King.

In 1775 O'Reilly asked Saavedra to be his aide-de-camp for the Spanish expedition to Algiers.

The campaign, poorly planned and poorly directed, was, however, a resounding failure; Saavedra blamed his superior for the high number of casualties, and the latter withdrew his friendship. Promoted to captain, Saavedra was assigned to Ciudad Real, although he was soon called upon for greater ventures thanks to the protection that Bernardo de Gálvez, one of the most influential individuals in the Court, began to give him. When in 1778 he was about to leave for Lisbon as secretary of the Spanish Embassy, the minister José Gálvez (Bernardo's uncle) offered him the post of fourth officer of the secretary of the Indies.

In his new assignment, Saavedra specialized in economic matters; he designed, for example, an ambitious plan for trade with the East Indies, which years later served as the basis for the founding of the Philippine Company. In any case, his experience in the office convinced him of the benefits of free trade as a source of wealth for developed nations.

In the midst of the war against England, in 1780, Charles III appointed Saavedra as royal commissioner in America, with the task of assisting Bernardo de Gálvez in the offensive against the English in the Gulf of Mexico, Jamaica and Guatemala. Specifically, Saavedra had to look for financial resources, mitigate the discord among the military chiefs and consolidate a common front with the French allies in the Jamaican campaign.

Saavedra set sail from La Coruña for Cuba, but was unable to reach his destination when he was captured by the English off the coast of Jamaica. He was imprisoned for several weeks in Kingston, and if he regained his freedom so soon it was undoubtedly because his captors were unaware of the relevance of his mission. An indefatigable intellectual, Saavedra took advantage of his forced stay in Jamaica to take some notes on the island's commerce, industry and geography.

After finally arriving in Havana in January 1781, he realized that the Spanish Navy was in a situation close to chaos, both because of the poor condition of the ships and the lack of supplies. Thanks to some credits from the Havana commerce, he was able to gather enough forces to float an expedition against the English square Pensacola, on the western coast of Florida, whose conquest was considered essential because that fortress was the center of enemy smuggling.

Defying the bad omens, the Spanish forces conquered Pensacola, an unexpected success that Charles III wanted to recognize by awarding Saavedra the Grand Cross of his Order. The details of this expedition can be followed through the diaries of Saavedra, who did not even skimp on details about the customs of the Indians.

It was much more difficult for Saavedra to coordinate with the French troops in the planned conquest of Jamaica, as both Kingdoms were short of troops, ammunition and money. He looked for resources in Mexico, this time with worse fortune, although of his passage through some cities of the viceroyalty there remains at least a written testimony on the evils of the Spanish commerce in America, weighed down in Saavedra's opinion by the high taxes and the obstacles to the freedom of the market. This failure did not discourage him; in 1782 he visited Paris and Madrid explaining his new plans, which were well received.

But even then, José Gálvez had other plans for his protégé. He asked him to return to America to be in charge of the Army and the Royal Treasury of Caracas, within the framework of the ambitious administrative reform that the Spanish Crown wanted to carry out in its American dominions. This intendancy, which had been created in 1776, included the provinces of Caracas, Cumaná, Maracaibo and the islands of Margarita and Trinidad, and was in a difficult situation due to allegations of corruption against the previous intendant. During his mission in Caracas, between March 1783 and May 1788, Intendant Saavedra developed a brilliant reforming work; by way of example, greater facilities were given to free trade (although Spain's control over a key product, cocoa, was not touched), obstacles and formalities were eliminated, the provincial accounts were balanced, docks, barracks and palaces were built, new crops were introduced, a consulate was erected in Caracas and an Audiencia was founded.

At the end of 1787, aware that his American journey was over, Saavedra asked to be relieved of his office. He obtained permission to return to Spain, married Rafaela de Jaureguiondo, valet to the princess of Asturias, and well into 1789 was appointed member of the Supreme Council of War, although his political ambition was higher.

After some years of ostracism, in November 1797 Saavedra was asked by Charles IV to take charge of the Ministry of Finance. In principle, he was expected to carry out a profound reorganization of the Spanish tax structure, which was going through great difficulties. To this end, Saavedra created the so-called Caja de Amortización, a desperate solution aimed at reducing the amount of public debt.

He also instituted the "patriotic" loan and the sale of titles of nobility, but he did not want to resort to more drastic and perhaps more necessary measures, such as the disentailment of Church property.

Although Manuel Godoy had supported Saavedra's ministerial appointment, the two men soon drifted apart, apparently because of Saavedra's refusal to support the diplomatic plans of the favorite, which at that time involved rapprochement with England. In this state of affairs, Saavedra formed a common front with the ministers Jovellanos and Cabarrús, who were also declared enemies of the Prince of Peace. After a stormy discussion between the two sides, Charles IV decided to dismiss his "friend Manuel" in March 1798, apparently under pressure from the French Directory. It has been attributed to Saavedra the drafting of the decree that dismissed Godoy, and that Charles IV signed as it was presented to him.

It was precisely Saavedra who replaced Godoy in the Ministry of State, without abandoning the Ministry of Finance, although this second secretariat would be managed by Miguel Cayetano Soler as superintendent.

As Minister of State, Saavedra's priority was to normalize relations with France; to this end, he expelled from Spain all the French exiles who had settled here fleeing the Revolution. At the zenith of his political career, Saavedra had the honor of posing for Goya, who portrayed him as he was, a tall, dark man with well marked features, to the point that his enemies derogatorily called him "El Gitano" (The Gypsy).

Despite appearances, the Saavedra of that time was no longer the energetic man of the days of America.

One of his subordinates in the office of State, the diplomat José León y Pizarro, presents a Saavedra who was a contemporary and weak in the management of public affairs, at the antipodes of the Prince of Peace: "With Mr. Saavedra - wrote Pizarro - everything loosened up and took on an air of general confidence; attendance was voluntary, and each officer, and the major proportionally, were left masters of grading the value of each paper that came, and of giving it at his pleasure the convenient direction". "Around him," added Pizarro with cruel sincerity, "everybody did what he wished.

His political career was cut short by a serious kidney disease, which first manifested itself on August 3, 1798. That morning he suffered a severe nephritic attack which, in his own words, had him "at the gates of the grave". After a long convalescence in El Escorial, in February 1799 he was forced to resign from the Ministry of State (he had already left the Treasury in September of the previous year), and asked for permission to recover his health in Andalusia.

Charles IV granted him the leave, although he wanted to reward the services of his already ex-minister with a lifetime seat in the Council of State. Some thought, maliciously, that Saavedra had been poisoned by Godoy's henchmen, something difficult to prove, but which gave Don Francisco the aura of a "martyr" persecuted by Queen Maria Luisa and by his no less unpopular favorite.

Between 1799 and 1803 Saavedra lived in different parts of Andalusia, until he settled in his native Seville. There his life passed peacefully until the French invasion of 1808. Although Cabarrús and other old friends encouraged him to join the cause of Joseph Bonaparte, he preferred to support the national cause; in May 1808 he was elected president of the Provincial Board of Seville, constituted to confront the invader. Under his mandate, that of Seville was possibly the Provincial Board that worked best, forming a dense network of local boards at his service; perhaps for this reason it adopted the pompous title of Supreme Board of Spain and the Indies.

When the Junta Central was formed in Aranjuez, Saavedra was given the post of Secretary of the Treasury, the same position he had held eleven years earlier. Saavedra therefore moved from Seville to Aranjuez in October 1808, although he returned to his hometown two months later in the face of the French advance. Saavedra held the Treasury portfolio for more than a year, and after leaving this post in October 1809, he was promoted to the Ministry of State. He served in this post for only three months, coinciding with the dissolution of the Central Board in January 1810.

Precisely, the final cause that precipitated the fall of the Central was the outbreak of a mutiny in Seville sponsored by the Junta Provincial, a body that Saavedra still formally presided over, although there is no record that he, weakened by his infirmities, participated in the events.

As soon as the Central was dissolved, Saavedra was sworn in on February 2, 1810 as one of the five members of the Council of Regency, the new sovereign body that united the anti-Napoleonic resistance. This appointment had much to do with the prestige that Saavedra enjoyed throughout Andalusia, so necessary at that time to avoid the dissolution of the national side. A new French advance forced him to take refuge in Cadiz, where he remained regent until the opening of the Cortes. After the end of the regency, Saavedra decided to retire from active politics and move to Ceuta with his entire family, citing health reasons. It is more than likely, however, that the real cause of Saavedra's departure was his rejection of the assumption of national sovereignty by the Cortes of Cadiz.

Saavedra returned to Seville in February 1813, as soon as the French troops had left Andalusia. Already then, his health was very broken, so he did not leave his hometown. He read, wrote and walked with difficulty, and could not even maintain his balance in the most acute stages of his kidney disease. Despite his delicate condition, in 1814 Ferdinand VII appointed him president of the Compañía del Guadalquivir, a new institution that was commissioned to develop a project to facilitate navigation between Seville and Cordoba. In 1817 he joined the Society of Medicine of Seville and was appointed president of the Economic Society, positions which, however, he was unable to perform effectively, because, already very ill, Saavedra died in November 1819.
