Jose de Galvez y Gallardo


Galvez and Gallardo, Jose de. Marques de la Sonora (I). Macharaviaya (Málaga), 2.I.1720 – Aranjuez (Madrid), 17.VI.1787. Lawyer, Attorney General of the Court House, Mayor of House and Court, General Visitor of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, Counselor of the Indies, Secretary of State and Office of the Indies, Governor of the Council of the Indies.

José de Gálvez y Gallardo belongs to a family especially significant in the service to the Crown at the end of the Old Regime. His three brothers and his nephew, who would become Count of Gálvez, were to a greater or lesser degree relevant people in the public life of their time. Thus, of his brothers, Matías would be viceroy of New Spain; Miguel, plenipotentiary minister in Berlin and Saint Petersburg, and Antonio, general commander of the Bay of Cádiz, while his nephew Bernardo, son of Matías, was governor of Louisiana and later viceroy of New Spain. As for the social origin of the Gálvez and Gallardo, if what is proven in their records of admission into the Royal and Distinguished Spanish Order of Carlos III is followed, it was a noble family with indisputable proof of nobility, although in the gossip of Madrid this extreme was questioned.

José de Gálvez y Gallardo was born from the marriage between the hidalgo Antonio de Gálvez y García de Carvajal and Ana Gallardo y Cabrera. When his father died in 1728, a period of economic hardship and social disdain began for his family. José's good disposition for letters led the bishop of Malaga, Diego González del Toro, to notice him, who protected him, gave him scholarships and directed him towards ecclesiastical studies. But it was the prelate who succeeded González del Toro in the Málaga miter, Gaspar de Molina y Oviedo, who would be his great protector and directed his steps towards the Court, after José had ruled out the ecclesiastical career, and once he finished his legal studies in Salamanca and Alcala. In them, the fact that Bishop Molina had been since 1733, a year before his appointment to the diocese of Malaga, president of the Council of Castile and general commissioner of the Crusade, played an important role; acceding in 1737 to the cardinal's purple. Thus, the protection of Cardinal Molina, and his good work in defense of the interests of Malaga before the courts of the Court, made Gálvez gain prestige as a lawyer. In these years, the young lawyer also began his social ascent, for which he followed the most used, ancient and safe path: a good marriage; In this way, in 1748 he married María Magdalena Grimaldo and, after she died, in 1749 he decided on a wealthy Frenchwoman, Luisa Lucía Romet, who would die four years later. With both marriages he had achieved a position in society and a good economic situation.

Lawyer for the French embassy and for the Prince of Asturias, he was appointed to a governorship in the Philippines, that of Zamboanga, which he never served.

He was already a character at Court; The affairs of the best families of the high nobility came to his firm.

In 1762 he would be promoted to the Attorney General of the Court Settlement. Although his great political opportunity would present itself in 1763, when Jerónimo de Grimaldi was called to occupy the First Secretary of State, and to be able to collaborate with him. In 1764 he was appointed mayor of Casa y Corte.

If that appointment, never exercised, for a Philippine governorship is excepted, Gálvez had not yet been seen to be directly related to the Indies. Although at the beginning of 1760 —according to Luis Navarro Tomás— he had written, in order to present it to the King, a Speech and reflections of a vassal on the decline of our Spanish Indies, which constitutes an unbeatable guide to know his thought about overseas affairs.

He would soon find himself in the American world: in 1765 he was named visitador of the viceroyalty of New Spain.

Indeed, in the Royal Decree of February 20 of that year he was named "General Visitor of all the courts of justice, boxes and branches of the Royal Treasury and of the proper and whims of the cities, towns and villages of that New Spain ”. Despite the breadth of his inspecting commission, it was the economic aspect that motivated his appointment as a result of a terrible report elevated to the throne by Francisco Carrasco y Montero, who in 1769 would be graced by Carlos III with the marquisate of the Crown. Carrasco, prosecutor at the time of the Supreme Council of Finance and later counselor of the Castile Council, had revealed the terrible state in which the Indian hacienda was found, and very singularly that of New Spain, which, given the legend of Mexican wealth , it was a difficult matter to understand in court. There were two reasons that the prosecutor gave to explain such a lamentable situation: on the one hand, the evils of the administration of the Indies, which required profound reforms, although their need was more appreciated by the Court than by the Creole oligarchies of the viceroyalties. American people; on the other, and referring specifically to the Mexican case, the bad government of Viceroy Joaquín de Montserrat y Ciurana, Marquis of Cruillas. Carrasco himself rejected the position of visitor before, it was accepted by the then corregidor of Murcia Francisco Anselmo de Armona y Murga, who died during the painful journey to his American destiny. These events triggered the appointment of Gálvez, who would be provided with official instructions for the development of his mission. According to them, in the economic aspect, his main objectives would be: first, to control the Mexican treasury in all its branches, income, agents and courts, trying, in any case, to increase the income of the Crown; second, to inspect the customs of the viceroyalty, both maritime and land, introducing, where appropriate, the necessary reforms; third, to put an end to the abuses, frauds, and contraband that chronically prevailed in the ports of Veracruz and Acapulco; fourth, establishment of the tobacconist's shop —the result of this initiative would be the erection of factories in Mexico City, Puebla de los Ángeles, Orizaba and Oaxaca—.

Along with those of economic content, Gálvez was entrusted with two tasks of great importance: the high inspection of the courts of justice of the viceroyalty and studying the opportunity and convenience of transferring the peninsular system of intendancies to those territories.

Likewise, he had a very reserved mission: to investigate the behavior of the Archbishop of Mexico, Manuel Rubio y Salinas; although his opportune death would make the visitor's inquiries useless.

While his mission lasted, Gálvez had to communicate all his actions to the viceroy, alter ego of the person of the Monarch in those territories. Soon, his friction and open confrontations with the Marquis de Cruillas were untenable, jeopardizing the success of his delicate mission. Informed the Court of what was happening in Mexico, a new viceroy was appointed in the person of the Flemish Carlos Francisco de Croix, Marquis de Croix, who held office between 1766 and 1771, being awarded the Captaincy General of Valencia. As a whole, Gálvez's visiting activity was a success: tax revenue from the viceroyalty treasury rose remarkably; he actively contributed to the reform of the army of the viceroyalty; he effectively collaborated in the expulsion of the Jesuits from Mexico, proceeding to quell the revolts that resulted in San Luis de la Paz, San Luis Potosí, Guanajuato and Valladolid de Michoacán; he encouraged the colonization of Alta California as a means of stopping the feared Russian expansion on the North Atlantic coasts. To him is due the creation of the cities of San Diego and Monterrey along with many missions and forts. An Indian revolt in Sonora prompted him to personally lead a punitive expedition against the insurgents, which seems to be the cause of a serious illness that made his return to the Peninsula advisable. Gálvez's time in New Spain had come to an end amid all kinds of intrigues and criticism of his work. On September 22, 1771, the new viceroy, Frey Antonio María Bucareli y Ursúa, took office. Two months later, on November 29, Gálvez embarked in Veracruz and, after a long stop in Havana, arrived in Cádiz on May 21, 1772. The rarefied atmosphere that had surrounded the visitor in his last Mexican period, which had left felt in the Court, presaged his political ruin when he arrived in Madrid. But the truth is that his stay in Mexico had given him an experience in the Indian administration that very few had; good proof of this is his instructive Report of the General Visitor of New Spain to the Hon. His Viceroy D. Antonio Bucareli y Ursúa in compliance with the Royal Order of May 24, 1771.

After his return from Mexico, on February 25, 1775, he married María de la Concepción Valenzuela, daughter of the counts of Puebla de los Valles, and from these his third nuptials would be born his daughter and heiress María Josefa de Gálvez y Valenzuela. As a prelude to his ministerial appointment, José took possession of his position as Effective Counselor of the Indies on July 7, 1772, to which he had been appointed on December 28, 1767 while he was carrying out his high visiting mission in Mexico. Member of the General Board of Commerce, Currency and Mines, he also held the presidency of the first room of the Council of the Indies.

On January 28, 1776, Friar Julián de Arriaga, Secretary of State for the Navy and the Indies, died in Madrid, succeeded by José de Gálvez in the office of the Indies. They accompanied him in the ministry, the Count of Floridablanca as first Secretary of State, Miguel de Múzquiz in Finance, Manuel de Roda in Justice, Funes de Villalpando in War and González de Castejón in Navy. A month after his appointment to the office of overseas affairs, Gálvez would be appointed by the King, governor of the Council of the Indies. In eleven years of intense work, Gálvez tried to put into practice the solutions that he had thought of during his Mexican period. Thus, he organized and implemented the most far-reaching reform in the overseas administration: the municipalities. He transformed overseas trade with the Free Trade Regulation of October 12, 1778, which, even with certain limitations relating to Venezuela and the Mexican ports of Veracruz and Acapulco, authorized direct trade to twelve Spanish ports with twenty-four Indian ports. But he would not end his work here; During the period that the Secretariat of the Indies held, the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata Provinces and the General Command of the Internal Provinces were founded, and the General Captaincy of Venezuela was structured into six governorates. In the field of legislation, he tried to make a new compilation of the laws of the Indies, given how obsolete the law of 1680 had become, and the regulations governing mining operations were significantly improved. His reforms, matured for many years, which were the result of his own experience in Indiana, had as their fundamental objective, in the words of Luis Navarro García, "the economic and military strengthening of the Empire through the rationalization of its administrative system, which would also be entirely centralized." , to add that his energetic direction of Indian affairs "allowed Spain to face the critical moment when the Russian presence looms over North America and the revolt of the English colonies of the continent takes place, even at this moment providing an advantage over Great Britain", although the heterodox of some of his actions and the resistance of the Creole elites to certain initiatives, caused criticism of his work to surface during his tenure, and that this, at least partially, was annulled by his successors in the Secretariat of Indies. Gálvez was also the creator of the General Archive of the Indies and a great promoter of scientific expeditions overseas.

On April 23, 1780 he would be appointed State Councilor; and at the end of his life King Carlos III distinguished him with the Marquisate of Sonora with the previous Vizcounty of Sinaloa, being the seat of the office of both titles dated October 9, 1785. Shortly after, on June 17 In 1787, José de Gálvez y Gallardo died in Aranjuez, where the Court was located, after a vine