Jose de Ezpeleta y Galdeano


Ezpeleta and Galdeano, José de. Count of Ezpeleta de Beire (I). Barcelona, 24.I.1742 before. – Pamplona (Navarre), 23.XI.1823. Military, captain general, viceroy of New Granada, Catalonia and Navarre.

José de Ezpeleta y Galdeano Dicastillo y Prado was a prominent member of that generation of Navarrese of noble origin who contributed to putting into practice, from their positions in the Administration and the Army, the political dictates of enlightened absolutism both in Spain and in America. . His career, like that of many other rulers of his generation, had two fundamental axes: the new professional army, created by the Bourbon dynasty, and Spanish America, precisely at the time when there was a true rise of Spanish power in the The new World. And he too, like most of his contemporaries, contemplated the collapse of the empire, in his case in a closer and more painful way, by personally suffering the consequences of the invasion of the Peninsula by Napoleon's troops.

Born in Barcelona, he was baptized in La Seo on January 24, 1742. He was the second son of Joaquín de Ezpeleta y Dicastillo, then captain of the Castilla Infantry regiment, a native of Pamplona, and María Ignacia Galdeano y Prado, a native of Olive (Navarre). By both lines he belonged to the oldest Navarrese nobility; his house, that of Ezpeleta de Beire, owned the dominions of Beire, San Martín de Unx, Rada, Goñi, Amatriain de Aoiz and Dicastillo de Viana; he enjoyed a seat in the Cortes Generales of the kingdom by the arm of the nobility. José inherited the headship of the house when his brother Joaquín, the eldest son, died in 1790, without leaving succession, and with her he became perpetual warden by oath of inheritance of the Royal Palace of Olite and merino mayor of his Merindad .

Like his father and most of his ancestors, José followed the career of arms. At fourteen he entered the Crown Infantry Regiment as a cadet; at sixteen he was promoted to second lieutenant; he remained four years in garrison in Ceuta.

He took part in the war with Portugal (from September 1762 to February 1763) with his regiment. A few months later he was appointed major assistant of the Navarra Regiment and sent to Cuba in the expedition of the Count of Ricla and Alejandro O'Reilly, the new governor and sub-inspector of the troops respectively, who were to receive the Plaza de La Habana from the English after their conquered by them the previous year in the course of the Seven Years' War. In Cuba, specifically in the central region of the island, and later in Puerto Rico, he actively participated in the implantation of the new corps of disciplined militias, infantry and cavalry reserve forces formed by the natives of the territories that were endowed with a regulation, training and military organization.

In September 1765 he returned to Spain with the rank of captain. In 1771, already promoted to sergeant major, he spent a year garrisoned in Oran. In January 1774, the Ávila military academy was founded under the direction of O'Reilly, and the Navarre Regiment, of which Ezpeleta was second in command, was sent to that city to serve as a model for the students of the Academy. In this fate, under the command of O'Reilly, a group of young officers who were later main protagonists in the war against England from 1779 to 1783 coincided: Bernardo de Gálvez, Esteban Miró, Francisco de Saavedra, Pedro de Mendinueta, the Cuban Gonzalo O'Farrill and others.

In July 1775, Ezpeleta had an outstanding participation in the disastrous landing in Algiers, which cost O'Reilly his job, but which earned him the promotion to colonel, when he was only thirty-four years old. Between February 1776 and February 1778 he remained in Pamplona as colonel-in-chief of his regiment.

He spent the rest of the year 1778 in El Ferrol, awaiting, together with his regiment, the embarkation for Havana, where he arrived in February 1779 as part of the Army of Operation that, commanded by Bernardo de Gálvez, was sent to the Cuban capital on the occasion of the declaration of war on England in the course of the independence conflict of the Thirteen Colonies. Ezpeleta and his Regiment of Navarra had a brilliant intervention in the western Florida campaign, which reconquered the places of Mobila and Pensacola from the English. Bernardo de Gálvez named him Major General of the Operation Army and left him there, as Governor of La Mobila, where he remained from January 1780 to February 1781.

Promoted to brigadier, he moved with Gálvez to the French Guarico, from February 1781 to the end of April 1783, while preparing the Franco-Spanish expedition against Jamaica, which was frustrated.

During that stay in Guarico, Ezpeleta sponsored Bernardo de Gálvez's eldest son, Miguel José de Gálvez y Saint Maxent, a sign of the trust and friendship that united him with the expedition leader.

In that interval he married in Havana María de la Paz Enrile y Alcedo, daughter of Jerónimo Enrile, later the first Marquis of Casa Enrile, a man from Cádiz of Genoese descent who had been a principal shareholder in the Compañía de Negros from Cádiz and maintained close relations with the elite of Havana landowners and merchants. The couple had ten children, four boys and six girls; the former all followed a military career and reached the rank of lieutenant general; one of them, Joaquín, was also Captain General of Cuba between 1838 and 1841 and later Minister of War. The eldest daughter, María de la Concepción, married Jerónimo Girón y Las Casas, eldest son of Jerónimo Girón y Moctezuma, Marquis de las Amarillas, and Isabel de Las Casas y Aragorri, sister of Luis de Las Casas who was Ezpeleta's successor in the General Captaincy of Cuba and later Secretary of War with Carlos IV; Jerónimo Girón and María de Ezpeleta were the parents of the Duke of Ahumada, founder of the Civil Guard.

His marriage to María de la Paz Enrile was the reason why he became involved in the smuggling process launched by the mayor of Havana, Juan Ignacio de Urriza, against the governor Juan Manuel de Cagigal and his aide Francisco de Miranda, in which Other habanero landowners and merchants were allegedly involved; Apparently, his involvement in the process was the result of a slanderous accusation, which led him to react energetically before the Council of the Indies itself, which affirmed his innocence.

When Bernardo de Gálvez temporarily returned to the Peninsula at the end of the war, in June 1783, he left Ezpeleta as his substitute in the government and Captaincy General of Louisiana and western Florida during his absence, putting him before other chiefs older than him. In September of that same year he was appointed inspector general of the troops of New Spain, although he remained in Havana in his capacity as substitute captain general of Louisiana and Florida, and his main activity consisted of the repatriation of the troops of the Army of Operation to Spain or shipping to other destinations in America.

Ezpeleta therefore resided in Havana since 1783, at least. There he coincided again with Bernardo —already converted into Count of Gálvez—, when he arrived in February 1785 to take possession of the General Captaincy of Cuba. When Gálvez was promoted to the viceroyalty of New Spain, in May of that same year, Ezpeleta marched with him to Veracruz, fulfilling his mission as inspector of the viceroyalty's troops from June to December of that year, while coordinating the repatriation of the troops of the Army of Operation from Havana to Spain, as a special order of Gálvez himself.

At the end of 1785, Ezpeleta returned to Havana, already as Governor and Captain General of Cuba, a government that he exercised until the end of April 1789. During the three and a half years that he held office, he was especially concerned with guaranteeing the defense of the island, boosting the defensive constructions and putting all the means at their disposal so that the veteran garrison had the expected strength. His second concern was the internal government; he issued an Instruction for captains and party lieutenants, a local government ordinance that was in force on the island until 1842; and he watched with special zeal the council elections of the cities and towns. He carried out an ambitious program of public works, of which the construction of the Government Palace stood out, in the Plaza Mayor of Havana, the main civil building on the island until the end of the 19th century, which his successor Las Casas was the first in dwelling As captain general, he also had the support and surveillance of the North American expansion on Louisiana and Florida; among other things, he was the first interlocutor of the first Spanish business manager in New York, José de Gardoqui; he coordinated the operation to evict the English from the Mosquitia, in 1787, after the agreement between Spain and England the previous year.

In January 1789, a few months before leaving Havana, he received the office with his promotion to field marshal along with his appointment as viceroy of New Granada. In this new and last destination in America, he more than confirmed his qualities as a typical ruler of enlightened despotism, especially recognized for his honesty and rectitude, along with a clear sense of authority and hierarchy in the exercise of office, which he did, however , compatible with signs of friendship and trust towards the closest subordinates and other close people. He liked to organize gatherings at his house, to which members of the elite of the Creole intelligentsia were invited.

That is why he felt especially betrayed when one of his regular guests, Antonio Nariño, a Creole from New Granada, secretly edited and disseminated through Santa Fe de Bogotá, in 1795, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of the French revolutionaries.

During his tenure, he was also concerned with public works and economic development, the development of arts and letters: he founded the Newspaper, the first unofficial publication of the viceroyalty. He was also the first ruler of New Granada to achieve a surplus in the budget of the Royal Treasury.

In December 1796 he left the viceroyalty, and embarked back to the Peninsula; he was then fifty-four years old. Once in Spain, and in recognition of his prestige, he received the title of Count of Ezpeleta de Beire and was promoted to Lieutenant General. He was part of the famous Junta de Constitución, formed by Minister Azanza for the reorganization of the army, along with Havana Brigadier Gonzalo O'Farrill and Luis de Las Casas, his political relative and successor in the Havana government. In November 1797 he was named Governor of the Council of Castile and Captain General of Castilla la Nueva.

In October 1798, apparently due to a misunderstanding with Queen María Luisa, he was relieved of both positions, although he received the appointment as State Councilor, and was sent from the barracks to Pamplona.

Here he stayed nine years, which served him to put order in his patrimonial interests. The new count of Ezpeleta enjoyed in Navarre about four thousand dollars of income, in addition to other seigneurial rights; He had a seat in the Courts of the Old Kingdom and was mayor of the Palace of the Kings of Navarre in Olite, where he took up residence in 1804. He visited his old friend almost daily, and formerly his subordinate in the Navarre regiment, Jerónimo Girón, then viceroy and captain general of Navarra, a relationship that led to the marriage between his eldest son and Ezpeleta's eldest daughter. According to his son-in-law, the Marquis de las Amarillas, in Pamplona they were very fond of him and called him “manzanica” because of the healthy and rosy appearance of his face.

In November 1807 he was appointed, to his surprise, Captain General of Catalonia. It is probable that, already fearing the French invasion at that point, Godoy chose a man of his experience for a position that would be one of the first to be affected, as it happened. When he arrived at his new destination, in February 1808, Duhesme's French troops were already stationed at the gates of the city.

In one of Ferdinand VII's first acts as king, on April 7, he appointed Ezpeleta director of the Artillery Corps, with a seat on the War Council, where he replaced the Cuban Gonzalo O'Farrill, shortly after José I's minister. In those frantic weeks before the French advance and the forced march of the royal family to Bayonne, the Infante Antonio Pascual appointed Ezpeleta, on May 1, president of a substitute Board of Regency in the event that the one established by him could not be constituted. Ferdinand VII when passing to Bayonne; but said Board never came to be formed and Ezpeleta did not move from Barcelona.

His attitude of resistance to the French presence earned him his dismissal and arrest in the same Catalan capital in September and, finally, his refusal to swear to José Bonaparte made him a prisoner and as such he was sent to France, and was in Montpellier from May 1809 to April 1814, although he was well treated by the French, who recognized his grade and assigned him a salary. He was released in April 1814, and at the end of May, when he was seventy-three years old, he was back in Pamplona; Shortly after, he traveled to Madrid and applied for a post, finally receiving the appointment of Viceroy of Navarre, which was, deep down, what he most desired.

He arrived in Pamplona on September 1, 1814. In October of that same year he received the Grand Cross from Carlos III and the appointment of captain general of the army, the highest military rank possible.

As viceroy of Navarre, he was responsible for restoring the functioning of the kingdom's institutions, which had been seriously altered by the French occupation. He had to face the revolt of Espoz y Mina, disappointed for not having received the viceroyalty of his homeland, and the local repercussions of other conspiracies of the time, such as the Triangle.

In 1820, the liberal revolution also triumphed in the city of Pamplona and Ezpeleta was dismissed; in his place, as captain general of the province, he was named Espoz y Mina. In 1822 he was required to move to Seville but due to his advanced age and poor health he was finally assigned to Valladolid. The absolutist restoration caught him at the house of his daughter in Santo Domingo de la Calzada, on the way to the Castilian capital.

In July 1823 he was reinstated in the viceroyalty of Navarra, but he resigned due to his state of health, and on November 23 of that same year he died at his home in Pamplona, at the age of eighty-two.