Jose Francisco Antonio Solano y Bote


Solano and Bote, Jose. Marquis del Socorro (I). Zorita (Cáceres), 6.III.1726 – Madrid, 24.III.1806. Marine, politician, scientist and explorer.

Descendant of a Navarrese family from Estella based in Extremadura in the years of the Reconquest, he was the son of Agustín Solano Carrasco and María Bote Moreno, both of immemorial noble status and blood, not of privilege. An ancestor of his, Juan Solano, who was related to the family of the conqueror of Peru, since he married Estefanía Pizarro, had council offices in Zorita and became ordinary mayor of that town in 1624 and 1641. His son Agustín was attorney and mayor of the Brotherhood. In the next generation, Pedro was qualified in a census as a hidalgo and by trade as a "two-yoke farmer." His son, Agustín, was the father of our character; His marriage to María Bote took place on February 8, 1717. José (who also received the names Francisco and Antonio in the act of his baptism by the Bishop of Plasencia, Fray Francisco Laso de la Vega) was the fifth among the eleven children they had: nine men and two women.

As was customary in the 18th century, in which an authentic "meritocracy of the nobility" developed, thanks to which the army and the Royal Navy nurtured their ranks with prominent members from that social group, attentive to try their services To the crown and the State the justice of his condition, José Solano y Bote leaned towards a naval career and entered the Royal Academy of Midshipmen of Cádiz, in whose company he sat down on February 2, 1742.

He already had some education, as a gentleman from Trujillo, a family friend, Pedro de Chaves, had taken him to Madrid to give him a career at the right time. At Court, little Solano learned Latin, the French language —to which he would later add English—, history, drawing, dancing, and swordsmanship. In his newly released military assignment, in which he was admitted without having turned sixteen, which was undoubtedly concealed by his stature and worldly development, he immediately showed a singular talent in such relevant subjects as arithmetic, cosmography, navigation and fortification. . In them, with the passage of time, he would show a singular talent, to such an extent that it is not doubtful to describe him as a "scientific" marine, the renovating human element of the Royal Navy who, in the happy expression of Cesáreo Fernández Duro, in front of the tradition of "hunting and breaststroke officers, more accustomed to rum than to equations", made study and knowledge the foundation of his career.

Perhaps it was this display of exposed conduct and desire to serve that caused him to be chosen by superiors to be part of the crew of the ship El León in 1744, when he moved to Cartagena with supplies to equip the Mediterranean squadron. On that occasion his baptism by fire took place, as his chief Juan José Navarro —since then Marquis de la Victoria— had to confront the British at Cape Sicié, with the result of their withdrawal to Mahón —then under his rule— and the Spanish-French allied victory. The honorable conduct of the young midshipman led to his immediate promotion to frigate lieutenant, in which capacity he received instruction in the command of naval artillery batteries, both with fixed and mobile targets; in those years he was also part of the crew of the ship El Constante, with effective performance in command of midshipmen. However, it would be his application in the study more than warlike opportunism that would determine his career in these decisive years of training and youth. Solano, knowing that the ship's captain Pedro Boyer was carrying out renovating naval construction tasks in Cartagena, asked to be assigned as his student, which he finally achieved, although it is noteworthy that he had to combine his learning with the tasks of his job. , the service in port and artillery batteries and the exits to the sea with the squadron. On one occasion when six ships under the command of Ignacio Duteul were transferred to Cádiz, he was part of the crew of El Soberbio; Once there, they received an order to convoy a merchant fleet to the Canary Islands, which they successfully complied with. In 1748 Solano returned to Cádiz and to the service of the Academy of Midshipmen, where Jorge Juan's patriotic conduct and projecting enthusiasm would present him with the first great opportunity of his career.

Juan was commissioned by the Marquis de la Ensenada to carry out in Great Britain an espionage trip aimed at renewing Spanish science and industry, he was ordered to choose companions who were outstanding in arithmetic, diligent, understanding, alert, and good manners. , distinguished birth and good looking. Solano was incorporated together with Pedro de Mora into the risky mission, with the explicit task of "perfecting himself in mathematics", although in reality he had to take care of obtaining as much information as possible about "navy artifacts and machines". The singular adventure began in August 1749, when both appeared in London before Jorge Juan and the plenipotentiary Ricardo Wall, who in an immediate dinner with ministers of His Britannic Majesty had to face embarrassing questions.

"What have these gentlemen come for?" asked one of them. "Time will tell," Wall replied. The plan was executed exactly, since Juan instructed Solano and Mora in mathematics and experimental physics, although it was the hiring of expert craftsmen and technicians and the espionage work that was decisive, and also the cause of its abrupt end. On one occasion, Solano was surprised upon entering the Deptford shipyard, where he had discovered a copper-coated frigate, and after getting a boatswain drunk, he learned of the organization of an expedition to settle the coast of Chile, in flagrant violation of current diplomatic agreements. Wall's timely protest undoubtedly worsened his situation, since he was not allowed access to either the Plymouth shipyards or Portsmouth. On the other hand, he obtained free passage in Chatham, thanks to the help of a certain Medina, a renegade Sevillian who worked as an interpreter for the admiralty.

Finally, while Juan achieved his purpose of hiring shipbuilders and cloth manufacturers, the decision was made to repatriate the risky sailor spies. One morning, Solano and Mora were picked up by Juan and taken to Canterbury and Dover, from where they went on to Calais and Paris. There they received experimental physics classes and later returned to Spain.

After the successful mission, Solano was assigned to Cartagena, where he collaborated with Juan in the works on the dock, and in May 1753 he moved again to the French capital, this time in the company of the Irish naturalist at the service of the Spanish crown, Guillermo Bowles, in order to perfect his chemistry studies.

He also had the opportunity at that time to collaborate in the navigation projects of the Tagus River between Aranjuez and Toledo, together with the engineers Arcón and Herrera.

Solano was required to command the boat in which the Kings wanted to travel a section of the river and he was ordered to form an explanatory memorandum of what had been done.

But these auspicious years of learning and service empowered him for larger undertakings, such as those that corresponded to an Atlantic Hispanic monarchy, in the process of reforming its political and scientific institutions. Thus, after the signing of the Treaty of Madrid in 1750, which established the limits between the possessions of the Spanish and Portuguese crowns in America and Asia, the intercession and confidence of the Minister of State José de Carvajal and once again of Jorge Juan induced his appointment on December 14, 1753 as fourth commissioner of the Expedition of Limits to the Orinoco, which was preceded by his promotion on February 10 of that same year to frigate captain. Having become Carvajal's scientific adviser, his intervention was decisive in the preparation of the expedition. First of all, Solano was in charge of choosing two midshipmen to collaborate in the scientific work. These were the Aragonese Vicente Doz, a great astronomer and cartographer, later a member of the expedition that measured the passage of Venus across the solar disk in California, director of the Noblemen's Seminary and member of the Limits Board, and the brilliant Granada cosmographer Nicolás Guerrero, who would die of fever shortly after returning from Venezuela. At his side, both acquired true competence in delicate matters: from the calculation of longitudes to the making of maps and the exploration of jungle territories. As it could not be less, Solano was also entrusted by Carvajal with the acquisition of the geometric, physical and astronomical books and instruments essential for the execution of his difficult task. While the telescopes, dials, quarter circles, theodolites, planches, globes, lenses, thermometers, barometers and microscopes were mostly purchased in London, the books reflected Solano's personal fondness for Newtonian science and "sublime" mathematics. , since he acquired works by Newton himself, Halley, Euler, Belidor, Bouguer, La Condamine, Juan and Ulloa.

The arrival of the members of the Orinoco Expedition to Venezuela occurred in April 1754, when the ravages caused by the Guaranítica war in Paraguay and the dispossession of the Jesuit reductions had aroused great opposition in America as in Europe to compliance with the Treaty of Madrid.

In the Venezuelan case, this was increased because the first commissioner, José de Iturriaga, had been director of the Guipuzcoana Company, which held the monopoly on the exploitation of cocoa, which caused serious conflict with the local population, who felt with often defenseless against their abuses. This meant that upon their arrival in Cumaná, whose astronomical position Solano took shortly after arriving, the expedition members did not achieve the naval preparations, escort troops and food requested from the governor of Nueva Andalucía, Mateo Gual. Forced, however, to navigate along the coast to enter the mouth of the Orinoco and reach the Caño Casiquiare and the Amazon River, where they had to meet as soon as possible with the Portuguese commissioners and begin drawing the dividing line, the expeditionaries they gave themselves up to a feverish activity. Solano and his officers took care during their stays on the islands of Margarita and Trinidad to facilitate the construction of boats.

They also implemented a scientific program, which included astronomical determination, climate studies, observation of plant species, and surveying of a general plan. The slow advance towards the interior and the loss of lives and supplies only subsided after the arrival in Santo Tomé de Guayana in July 1755 of the survivors, many of them sick and "defeated by the downpours and floods of the Orinoco River".

Once restored to the missions of the Catalan Capuchins of the Caroní, Solano and his men found themselves ready to undertake what was their greatest service to the Expedition: the passage of the rapids of Atures and Maipures, which marked an impassable border for the Spaniards. , subjected to pressure in the Orinoco from the armies of the Caribs allied to the Dutch of Suriname and to the presence in the Amazon of the Portuguese slave hunters. On March 28, 1756, José Solano, accompanied by two hundred auxiliary Indians, managed to overcome the first of these geographical accidents, formed by whirlpools, rocks and dangerous rapids. His feat made it possible to reconsider the strategy of the expedition which, by establishing itself solidly in two new towns in the middle Orinoco, Ciudad Real and Real Corona, facilitated its immediate integration into the General Captaincy of Venezuela. As for Solano himself, his activity was tireless, since in 1757 he traveled along the route of the Meta River to Santafé de Bogotá, where he obtained from Viceroy Solís the delivery of various relief supplies. At the beginning of the following year, displaying an autonomy that no one dared question him anymore, he once again crossed the rapids to the south and promoted a project aimed at integrating the Alto Orinoco and consolidating the border with Portuguese Brazil in a definitive way. Very skilful in relations with the natives, before whom he presented himself as "a Spaniard of the king" and thanks to the friendship of Crucero, chief of the Guaipunabis, he founded San Fernando de Atabapo, and in 1759 and 1760 his alliance with Mazerinabis, mengepures and manaus made possible the establishment of San Felipe, Esmeraldas and San Carlos de Río Negro, since then the last Spanish settlement in the region. Other explorations promoted by him went to the sources of the Orinoco and in search of wild peanuts. During this stage, the cartographic results were outstanding, as Solano created a large map of the course of the Orinoco and, together with his disciples, prepared a multitude of charts and partial sketches, the true foundation of the geography of Guyana since then.

The cancellation of the Treaty of Madrid in 1761 and the immediate order for the expedition members to return to the Peninsula stopped such important work, even temporarily, since Solano's stay on the peninsula was brief and his return to Venezuela almost immediate. Invested with the position of captain of the ship, which he obtained on July 13, 1760, and after commanding a ship, the Rayo, for a brief period, he was appointed lieutenant of the midshipmen company of Cádiz. In 1762 he married Rafaela Ortiz de Rozas, born in 1743 in Buenos Aires, where her father Domingo, honored with the title of Count of Populations, was then Captain General. His personal happiness was completed the following year with the granting of a habit of the Order of Santiago and —in what constituted an unprecedented political escalation— he was appointed by Carlos III on May 23, 1763 Governor and Captain General of Venezuela . His government there is remembered as one of the most fertile of the century, and was characterized by a powerful strategic vision and the promotion of explorations and foundations in the continental interior.

Solano promoted a vast plan aimed at obtaining geographical relations of the territory, reformed the road network, promoted the reconstruction of the damage produced in 1766 by an earthquake, improved hospitals and hospices, encouraged agriculture, installed maritime mail with post offices in Caracas and Puerto Cabello and supported the transfer of the capital of Guayana —converted in 1762 into a separate command post— to the Angostura del Orinoco.

He also articulated a defense plan with privateering boats and coastal fortifications and established the disciplined militias of whites, browns and browns, so important in a Caribbean region exposed to attacks from the British. On April 14, 1771, he handed over command to his successor and went on to serve as the General Captaincy of Santo Domingo, as well as the presidency of the Royal Court, based in the primate city of America. There he put the same Enlightenment policy into practice, so that he unhesitatingly promoted trade, formed a farmers' council to promote the cultivation of sugar cane and tobacco, founded a school of mathematics, promoted the improvement of fortifications and public buildings, and pursued contraband and illegal gambling. Between 1773 and 1776, he participated in the negotiation of a boundary agreement with the French for the western part of the Hispaniola island, in order to prevent their encroachment and to have perpetual boundaries. The placement of cairns and pyramids by officials in charge of putting them into practice was the definitive consecration of him.

The long years of political command in America, with distance from the Royal Navy, motivated Solano to request his reinstatement in 1778. Initially assigned to El Ferrol, he was promoted the following year to squad leader, and after a stay in Brest he went to Cádiz in January 1780, where he was assigned command of the ship San Luis. The following month, the last big opportunity of his career presented itself, and as usual he jumped at it. In the middle of the North American war of independence, he was placed in command of a war squadron of twelve ships, two frigates, a chambequin and a packet boat, and received the order to protect a convoy of one hundred vessels and thirty-eight more from trade, which had to go to Havana with artillery relief, eight thousand infantry men and two reinforcement regiments. He not only managed to get her seaworthy on short notice, but avoided British naval harassment by the "happy ruse" of choosing a defeat from Tenerife to Dominica, and arrived at Guadalupe, Puerto Rico and Havana without incident. This success guaranteed the reinforcement of the garrisons of the islands, Guatemala and New Spain and made possible the campaigns against the British establishments in Mosquitia, Roatán, Providencia, Bahamas and Florida. Regarding the latter, Solano achieved the greatest glory of his career, for in September 1780 he was ordered to leave Havana with his squadron of seven ships, four frigates, one xebec, and one packet boat, escorting the convoy of fifty. and a ship with almost four thousand men from the expedition commanded by field marshal Bernardo de Gálvez, whose goal was the capture of Pensacola (in Spanish Panzacola, in a perfect description of the shape of the coast in this town in the west of that peninsula. ) and one of the major objectives of the conflict, due to what it could mean to weaken British weapons in the New World. Although a strong storm prevented the first landing attempt, in March 1781 the ambitious and daring Gálvez —who in his heart of hearts despised the wise prudence of the Navy officers— finally besieged the plaza, with forces close to eight thousand men. The besiegers being endangered by the arrival of a strong enemy contingent, Solano went with his squadron and protected the military operations, which lasted sixty-one days, the last twelve in an open trench. Although Solano was not present at the British surrender on May 8, due to storms and contrary winds, he was rewarded in 1782 with the rank of lieutenant general. Turned into chief of the vital Havana post and in command of the King's vessels in North America, until the Peace of Paris in 1783 that concluded the war, he rightly maintained naval activity in the Caribbean and took part in an attempt to capture of Jamaica and in the defense of Cuba against an attack by Admiral Rodney. It is important to note that Solano's squadron was not exclusively an efficient military machine; At his direct instigation, important cartographic problems were addressed and several members of one of the most outstanding generations of the illustrated navy completed their training, such as Federico Gravina or José de Mazarredo.

In July 1783, after receiving a visit in Havana from Prince William and Admiral Hood, former enemies, in celebration of the end of the war, Solano returned to Cádiz in command of a valuable squadron, but was relieved of command and arrested. on the island of León for an unsubstantiated charge of smuggling, perhaps instigated by the envious Gálvez. Once the charges were clarified, on July 25, 1784 Carlos III granted him the title of Marquis of Socorro.

Shortly after he was appointed War Counselor, with destination in Ferrol. In 1790 he was given responsibility for armaments in the departments of Cádiz and Ferrol and he was responsible for commanding squads against the British in Finisterre and Cádiz, armed on the occasion of the events in Nutka, in Alaska. That same year he received the great cross of the order of Carlos III and the appointment of gentleman of the chamber with exercise, while his wife was granted the band of the order of queen María Luisa.

In 1793 he was granted a place in the Council of State and still in 1794 and 1796 he had command of squadrons destined for America. He lived the last years of his life complaining about his narrowness and the non-payment of his emoluments and the death of many of his thirteen children, although he had the courage in 1797 to write his memoirs to them. Still in 1802 he had the responsibility of the naval command, as he went with a squadron to Naples to pick up María Antonia, the fiancée of the Prince of Asturias, the future Fernando VII. José Solano achieved the highest rank that could be achieved in the Navy on October 5, 1802, with the promotion to captain general, and he died in Madrid in 1806 surrounded by the appreciation of all, in time to avoid the suffering of seeing the monarchy disappear. that had served both hemispheres so well. He was buried in the Convent of Carmen Descalzo of the town and court and his corpse was shrouded with the habits of Santiago and Carlos III and the scapular of the Virgen del Carmen.

He was survived by three children, Francisco María, 2nd Marquis of Socorro and Marquis of La Solana, died 1808; Estanislao, who died in 1840, and María de la Concepción, who disappeared in 1862.