José Antonio Montes de la Puente

Montes de la Puente, José Antonio. Spain, 1722 - sailing from Chiloé to Valparaíso (Chile), 22.III.1800. Military and governor of Chiloé (Chile).

Captain of the Spanish Royal Infantry Guards; brigadier. Member of the Royal Basque Society of Friends of the Country. Provisional political and military governor of Chiloé (Chile) by title of October 30, 1795. From Peru he traveled in the brigantine Limeño to the port of Corral (Valdivia), sailing to Chiloé, four days later, where he arrived (February 1797). He notified the Prince of Peace, San Carlos, on March 31, 1797, that he was aware of his reserved letter of July 23, 1796, regarding the fear of a forthcoming war with England, expressing the strategic value of the archipelago and territory under his command and the care it deserves.

He published a good government proclamation, in San Carlos, on June 20, 1797, date in which he ordered the division of that southern province in eleven parties.

He was appointed captain general and president of Chile, replacing Marshal Joaquín del Pino, who had been elevated to the viceroyalty of Peru as successor to the Marquis of Osorno, by Royal Order given in Aranjuez on June 24, 1800. He was designated successor in second instance to the Viceroyalty of Peru, after José Fernando de Abascal, in the shroud sheet, in case of death of the viceroy del Pino, however, having received by reserved way order to move to Santiago de Chile for the future succession of the president of this kingdom; elected in June of 1800, he had to go to the same due to his serious state of health, dying during the voyage between San Carlos and Valparaíso. He had married María Teresa García, with whom he had two daughters. The Royal Treasury, by Royal Order given in Aranjuez on March 4, 1802, by power granted to the viceroy of Buenos Aires, paid for the transfer to Spain of the widow and her orphans, together with María Luisa de Esterripa, widow of the president of Chile Luis Muñoz de Guzmán, and Josefa Lerín y Clavijo, widow of the governor of Valdivia Mariano de Pusterla.

 

Bibl.: J. T. Medina, Diccionario Biográfico Colonial de Chile, Santiago, Imprenta Elzeviriana, 1906, p. 391; L. de Roa y Urzúa, El Reino de Chile, 1535-1810, estudio histórico, genealógico y biográfico, Valladolid, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Instituto Jerónimo de Zurita, 1945, p. 964; G. Guarda (OSB), Los Encomenderos de Chiloé, Santiago, Ediciones Universidad Católica de Chile, 2002, p. 391.