José de Carvajal y Lancáster

Carvajal y Lancaster, José de. Cáceres, 16.III.1698 - Madrid, 8.IV.1754.
Great of Spain, statesman, diplomat and minister.
He was born into an illustrious Extremaduran dynasty.
His father, Bernardino de Carvajal y Vivero Moctezuma, III Count of
Enjarada, and his mother, Josefa de Lancáster (or Alencastre) y Noroña,
belonged to a family that inherited the ducal titles of Abrantes and
Linares. José was the sixth of the nine children of the couple, who grew
up in an austere and deeply religious environment that favored a strong
fraternal cohesion among them. José's three sisters were nuns in Madrid
and two of his brothers were priests: one refused the bishopric of Jaén,
and the other accepted the bishopric of Cuenca, where he distinguished
himself for his support of the Jesuits. Two other brothers embraced the
military career: the first-born, Juan, Duke of Abrantes, became
lieutenant general, refused the viceroyalty of New Spain (1742) and
retired to live in Cáceres; Nicolás, also lieutenant general, was colonel
of the Regiment of Royal Infantry Guards.
These two were the only ones who married. José, for his
part, embarked on a career as a lawyer.
He attended almost all of his university studies in Salamanca, at the
Colegio Mayor de San Bartolomé el Viejo ( 1717-1727). After several
unsuccessful attempts, he obtained a position as oidor in the
Chancillería de Valladolid ( August 8, 1729), becoming dean oidor and
president of one of its civil chambers. He was almost forty years old
when he was appointed to one of the two newly created posts of oidores in
the Council of the Indies ( January 27, 1738). His legal culture and his
capacity for work caught the attention of the Count of Montijo, president
of this Council, who promoted him to a supernumerary position in the
Chamber to prevent him from moving to the Council of Castile ( April 29,
1740). When the same Montijo left as extraordinary ambassador to the
electoral Diet of Frankfurt, he took Carvajal with the title of second
ambassador, especially in charge of documenting the Spanish pretensions
to the succession of Austria. From January 29 to March 13, 1731, the two
men stopped in Paris: the only opportunity Carvajal had to make contact
with the Court of Louis XV, to whom he was introduced. After the imperial
election in Frankfurt (January 24, 1742), relations between the two men
soured and Carvajal obtained permission to return to Madrid, where he
arrived in July.
In the capital he knew how to ingratiate himself with the minister
Campillo, who asked him for several reports on the affairs of the Indies
and named him interim governor of the Council of the Indies, with the
necessary powers to govern it during the absence of the president
(October 23, 1742). The unexpected death of Campillo (April 10, 1743) and
the return of Montijo (February 12, 1744) hindered the promotion of
Carvajal, who was removed from the direction of the Council, retaining
only his title of governor, but without exercise or authority. However,
he had already taken measures to prevent such an eventuality. His
collaboration with the now deceased Campillo had helped him to get closer
to h i s successor, the Marquis de la Ensenada, who, still little aware of
the affairs of America, continued to entrust him with many reports. He
also often consulted him on matters of industry and commerce, and was so
satisfied with his work that he promoted him to the presidency of the
General Board of Commerce ( January 24, 1746), Carvajal's first
"political" post.

It was probably during the last two years of the reign of Philip V when a
network or pressure group was formed around Ensenada, whose contours were
still poorly defined, where the supporters of a change of team (throwing
out the men of Queen Farnese) and the advocates of more radical reforms,
not only political, but also economic, social and cultural, were grouped
together. Although, as a minister, Ensenada did not appear in the
f o r e g r o u n d , his friends were very active: the Duke of Montemar, the
Count of Valdeparaíso, the family of Alba (close to Carvajal) and, of
course, Carvajal himself, who was considered to be the coordinator,
especially since he had managed to establish secret contacts with the
princes of Asturias, the future King and Queen.
Moreover, of all this group, he was the only one who, it s e e m s , had a
fairly precise idea of what he intended to put into practice. His
Political Testament, written in 1745, had the appearance of a government
program.
He advocated a series of economic measures with a view to restoring the
prosperity and greatness of the kingdom, and to achieve such an
ambitious goal, he considered it essential to have a long period of
peace, which implied the liquidation of the ongoing war and the
revision of Spain's traditional system of alliances: it was necessary
to distance itself from France and draw closer to Portugal, Austria and
England.
The accession to the throne of Ferdinand VI (July 9, 1746) made the
Court of Madrid a hotbed of intrigue.
Unintelligent, indecisive, tormented by unhealthy scruples that his wife
strove to quiet, the new sovereign seemed unable to fail among the men of
the past reign and the reformers.
In the number of these, Carvajal continued in his role of secret
advisor to the Kings and to him we probably owe, with the consolidation
of Ensenada a moment threatened, the appointments to several key
positions: Vázquez Tablada, a former companion of Valladolid, to the
governorship of the Council of Castile; the Dukes of Huéscar and
Sotomayor, to the embassies of Paris and Lisbon; the Marquis de la
Mina, to the command of the Army of Italy. Not for that reason their
adversaries did not cease and they fought to assure themselves the
control of the King, removing the Queen, whose influence they feared,
from the government. At this juncture, the Portuguese ambassador, very
attached to the Sovereign, his compatriot, decided to intervene and
suggested that Carvajal be appointed to replace the first Secretary of
State Villarías, leader of the opponents of the change. The Queen, the
general inquisitor and the governor of the Council of Castile obtained
the consent of the King; the Jesuits, that of Carvajal, although the
latter refused the title of secretary of State, which he judged
inferior to his lineage.
Therefore, a Royal Decree conferred upon him the post of Minister of
State and Dean of the Council, with exclusive direction of foreign
affairs and broad powers for the promotion of the economy (December 4,
1746). In the following months he continued to accumulate positions and
honors: gentilhombre de cámara ( 1747), superintendent of posts and
mails (1747), governor of the Council of the Indies with exercise
( 1748), later knight of the Golden Fleece ( 1750). As soon as he was
installed in power, the new minister took or inspired some spectacular
measures such as the substitution of the French confessor of the King by
another Jesuit, Spanish, father Rávago, former confessor of Carvajal in
Valladolid (April 16, 1747), and the confinement in San Ildefonso of the
Queen mother, Isabel de Farnesio (July 23, 1747), with which his favor
seemed so accredited that it spread the word that he was going to become
prime minister.

The reality was very different and, to understand it, it is necessary to
scrutinize the personality of the minister. A forty-eight year old
bachelor, honest, upright, very religious, he had a cold, dry, sometimes
abrupt and blunt manner (his friends nicknamed him Uncle No Such).
A staunch friend of the truth, he fled from any compliment, even
innocent, that might affect it. Not only did he openly despise a
Farinelli, but he did not even take the trouble to please his masters
whom he loved and needed. Of average intelligence, extremely laborious,
a subject of vast reading, he worked non-stop, but alone: the incredible
quantity of documents written by his hand that are preserved in the
archives is astonishing. Despite his lack of practical experience in many
of the businesses entrusted to him, he trusted no one and paid little
attention to the advice of others. Almost all his contemporaries agree on
these traits and the minister does not deny them when he portrays himself
as follows: "My meditation is more than my understanding. I am rigid in
my opinions and tenacious, and it is not out of vanity but because I
cannot silence the pangs of what I understand to be unreason in my
interior.
My way of disputing is very rough and I lose my reason if I manage to
have it".
Such characteristics contrasted completely with those of Ensenada, a
lavish, attentive, open, insinuating man, lavish in praise and expert in
winning friends, but also a man of the field, seasoned in business and
head of four ministerial departments.
Although at first both supported each other and were in agreement on the
plan to restore the Monarchy to its former splendor, they soon disagreed
on how to achieve it, and the overlapping of their respective
competencies multiplied the occasions of conflict between them. In the
diplomatic field, which normally depended on Carvajal, his colleague
intervened several times. In the economic field, serious confrontations
opposed the Secretary of State for Finance and the President of the
Board of Trade. On the problems of America, there were also
disagreements between the Secretary of State and the Governor of the
Council of the Indies. At such a juncture, it is worth asking whether
the well-known rivalry between the two ministers did not stem more from
so many accumulated disagreements than from the much-decanted, and
supposed, Anglophilia of the one and Francophilia of the other. Be that
as i t may, it seems evident that these tensions did not harm the proper
functioning of a government that the Catholic King was not capable of
regulating.
Within this context, foreign policy is the best known part of Carvajal's
performance.
He had first to finish with the war undertaken in the previous reign,
although changing the order of priorities then in force: the problems of
Gibraltar and Menorca, of the seat of blacks passed to first line; the
establishment of the infante Felipe, to second. But France, ignoring
these pretensions, signed with the allies, without the participation of
Spain, the Treaty of Aachen (1748) by which the Court of Madrid only
obtained a modest establishment for the prince. This procedure deeply
wounded Ferdinand VI and his minister, who was confirmed in his distrust
of France. Therefore, he took great care to keep her out of his political
projects, which were inspired by his political Testament.

His first initiative, then supported by Ensenada, was the negotiation
with the Portuguese ambassador and the signing of the Treaty of Madrid
(January 5, 1750), which fixed the limits between the Spanish and
Portuguese possessions in South America: in exchange for the Colonia del
Sacramento, Spain ceded an important part of eastern Uruguay, including
some Jesuit missions whose transfer was foreseen.
The treaty had bad luck. After a few months, a new Lusitanian minister,
Carvalho, put obstacles to its execution, at the same time that the
Jesuits of the missions and their Indians opposed the operation.
Deeply disappointed by the attitude of the Society of Jesus, deeply
affected by the difficult application of the agreement, Carvajal died
before he dared to give an account to the King.
With the new British envoy Keene, whom he quickly befriended, Carvajal
undertook another negotiation aimed at resolving the pending litigious
points between the two countries. A treaty was signed in Madrid (December
5, 1750) by which Great Britain renounced the seat of blacks and ship of
permission by means of the payment of 100,000 pounds sterling and the
confirmation of old commercial advantages. This treaty clearly manifested
Spain's new independence from France, as the latter was informed only
after the conclusion.
For Carvajal this was a first step on the road to a possible alliance
between the Cortes of London and Madrid, but although the talks
continued, his hopes were dashed by the English government's refusal to
discuss the eventual return of Gibraltar and Menorca and by the
impossibility of reaching an agreement on the problem of smuggling in
America and the evacuation of the English establishments in the Bay of
Honduras.
In Italy, already abandoned the policy of conquests, Carvajal proposed to
organize a system of neutrality that would assure the tranquility of the
infants implanted there. Supported by England, he signed with Austria and
Sardinia the treaty of Aranjuez (June 14, 1752) that responded to his
objectives. Once again he waited for the conclusion to inform France,
where the minister was described as a "political Quixote that the courts
of Vienna, London and Sardinia mock at the expense of Spain". Carvajal's
Italian success was, however, marred by the resistance of the princes of
Naples and Parma to agree to the treaty and even more by the conclusion,
behind their backs, of a concordat with the Court of Rome (January 11,
1753), negotiated there by an agent of Ensenada.
It was precisely at that time that a French diplomatic offensive took
place, which would last beyond the death of the minister. Well aware of
the deterioration of Spanish-French relations, particularly worrisome in
the increasingly probable case of a Franco-British conflict, the Court of
Versailles decided to send a h i g h - r a n k i n g ambassador to Madrid, the
Duke of Duras: with great care he was to try to reestablish harmony
between the Bourbon Cortes and bring Spain back into the French alliance.
But, without taking into account the advice of prudence, the young and
impetuous diplomat wanted to burn stages and proposed to Carvajal to
negotiate with him a defensive treaty that would make clear to the
enemies of the house of Bourbon the existing solidarity between its two
branches. But neither Ferdinand VI nor Carvajal had the slightest
intention of renouncing their policy of independence and balance. After
bitter debates, sprinkled with counterclaims and threats, the minister
had no choice but to declare in writing to Duras that his master
considered a new treaty useless and even inopportune,

since family ties were enough to lead him to help his cousin if the
latter was "oppressed by his enemies" (November 14, 1753): a position
that coincided with that expressed by Carvajal in his Pensamientos,
written around the same time. When i n f o r m e d , the English ambassador
acknowledged with satisfaction that Carvajal's expressions were so vague
that "they could have been addressed without scruple to the Grand Turk
in person".
He also tried to take advantage of the situation to incite Spain to
detach itself completely from French tutelage, joining Britain and
Austria by another treaty, which Carvajal refused in accordance with his
constant political guideline, summarized by Keene: "Spain will not
offend any great power or join with it, but will wait for events and
then slowly take its side". Thus the system of vigilant neutrality that
Ferdinand VI maintained after Carvajal's death was in a certain way
foreshadowed.
When evaluating Carvajal's foreign policy as a whole, it seems difficult
to arrive at an equitable balance. On the one h a n d , it is true that he
was able to regularize Spain's relations with Portugal and Austria, that
he took the country out of the orbit of France, and he notably improved
the atmosphere of relations with England. But on the other hand, with the
exception of the neutralization of Italy, he accumulated many failures:
the Treaty of Limits got bogged down, relations with France became
strained and, above all, the hope of reaching an agreement with England
on Gibraltar, Minorca and America was dashed, thus frustrating the dream
of a possible alliance. In s h o r t , although it is evident that Carvajal
could not fully achieve any of his objectives, it is no less certain
that, assuming his aims were reasonable, he lacked time, adequate means
and the support of a united government.
Other aspects of Carvajal's public activity may have been relegated to
the background because of his very visible role in the foreign policy of
the Monarchy, but his dedication to them was of as much or more
importance in his opinion, as were culture and above all the industrial
and commercial development of the country. Thus, he had an effective
participation in the creation or operation of the official centers that
were the academies. Associated since 1746 with the preparatory work of
the Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando, he became its official
protector when it was established by decree (April 12, 1752); he was
also director of the Royal Spanish Academy ( May 13, 1751) and through
his department passed the approvals and stimuli granted to various
academies of the country (Barcelona, Seville, etc.).
On the other hand, it is worth noting his unusual interest in the
archives of the kingdom. He planned to locate them, classify them and
make inventories of them, particularly those of public administrations
and private institutions. He began by creating a general commission for
the investigation and copying of the most important documents for the
ecclesiastical and civil history of Spain (March 3, 1750), one of his
tasks being to gather those that could support the Spanish claims in the
debates about the Royal Patronage. The direction and coordination of the
work carried out in the public, ecclesiastical, municipal and other
archives of various cities was entrusted to a Jesuit, Father Burriel,
who from Toledo, where he resided, continued to correspond with the
minister until his death.
Carvajal's concern for industry and commerce seems to date back to his
arrival in Madrid.

It is already evident in his political Testament. It was made official by
his appointment to the presidency of the Board of Trade and confirmed by
his promotion to the Ministry of State, whose decree granted him
extensive powers for the advancement of factories, trade and the
promotion of "any projects [...] new plants or better regulation of the
previous ones".
His powers increased even more when the Junta de Comercio was joined by
the Junta de las Minas ( April 3, 1747) and the Junta de Dependencias de
Altranjeros ( December 21, 1748). Endowed with so many attributions,
Carvajal had little practical experience in economic matters, although he
had enough theoretical knowledge drawn from his immense reading. He was
p a r t i c u l a r l y enthusiastic, somewhat naively, about the mercantilist
authors whose prescriptions he adopted and insisted on applying without
ever questioning them. Moreover, he wanted to undertake everything at
once and to achieve rapid results. His predominant idea was to develop
factories and trade by means of privileged trading companies, of which
the King would be a shareholder. Thus were born the Royal Companies of
commerce and factories of Extremadura ( May 22, 1746), of Zaragoza ( July
27, 1746), of Seville ( August 7, 1747), of Granada ( August 20, 1747), of
Toledo ( January 10, 1748). At the same time the Royal cloth factories of
San Fernando de Henares ( 1746- 1749) and Brihuega (1749) and the silk
factory of Talavera de la Reina ( 1749) were created, while the minister
did not cease to encourage the factories of previous foundation, such as
those of Guadalajara. From the beginning, the problems posed by this
policy were enormous: shortage of money, lack of labor, especially
qualified labor, and strong protests from the industrialists harmed by
the advantages granted to the state enterprises. The most bitter
confrontations between Carvajal and Ensenada took place over these
issues, more than over those of foreign policy.
The latter wrested from the King a decree suppressing a large part of the
exemptions granted to the privileged companies (June 24, 1752). To this
blow aimed directly at him, Carvajal replied with a long representation
(August 16, 1752) which gave rise to another decree reestablishing the
advantages abolished the previous year (March 30, 1753): this period
marks the climax of the struggle between the two ministers. Be t h a t as it
may, Carvajal's economic policy was a failure, already underlined by a
contemporary analyst: "He spent a lot and everything was useless, and the
same happened in almost everything he undertook, not because of a lack of
love and zeal [...], but because he did not trust anyone and wanted to do
everything by himself, which is why his conduct was unfortunate and his
good wishes had no success or effect".
In assessing the results of the minister's domestic and foreign
policy, it must be acknowledged that they were incomplete and somewhat
disappointing, especially in relation to the goals he had set for
himself.
Although he scored a few successes, on the other hand, he reaped many
setbacks that perhaps , with more time and in a more favorable
context, could have been remedied. In any case , when on the morning of
April 8, 1754 Carvajal died almost suddenly in his room at the Buen
Retiro, the grief was unanimous. The King and Queen shed tears in
public, France expressed its respect for a politician "of great honesty"
and the English ambassador, lamenting the disappearance of "the best man
and friend I have ever known" did not hesitate to add: "The world has
not produced a truer, more honest man, of more noble sentiments than the
late minister".

All these comments, although they pay a marked homage to Carvajal's
personality and human qualities, do not allude at all to his ministerial
balance. In this respect, one could only read in the official obituary
published in the Gaceta de Madrid of A p r i l 16: "He established the good
correspondence of our Court with the foreign ones, assured peace and
promoted the Arts with singular attention to the good of the monarchy and
the glory of the King".

