Juan Manuel de Cagigal de la Vega y Montserrat


Cagigal de la Vega y Montserrat, Juan Manuel de. Santiago de Cuba (Cuba), 31.III.1738 – Valencia, 28.VIII.1808. Lieutenant general, governor, knight of the Order of Santiago.

Son of Vicenta Antonia Montserrat (or Monserrate) and the Marquis of Cagigal, Francisco Antonio de Cagigal de la Vega (1691-1777), who was interim viceroy of New Spain and captain general of the island of Cuba. He embraced the career of arms at a very young age, as a “cadet at his own expense” of the Portuguese Regiment (November 29, 1745) and the Havana battalion (January 20, 1748). Under the tutelage of his father he was promoted to infantry captain (July 29, 1749) and lieutenant colonel (May 10, 1754) of the aforementioned Havana Regiment. In 1760 he went with his father to New Spain (Mexico), as assistant to the viceroy, his father, and with him he went to Spain, once the viceroyalty ended. War was declared against England and Portugal, the young Cagigal asked to serve in it, first as aide-de-camp to Lieutenant General Francisco de Cagigal, his father, in the Vitoria infantry regiment, the traditional closed preserve of the Cagigal family, and later, to the orders of the Marquis of Sarriá, achieving distinguished honors (knight of the Order of Santiago) and praise in 1762 and taking part in the main actions of that campaign. He was promoted to colonel of infantry (August 1762) and was given, after peace, in 1763, command of the Victoria regiment.


In 1766 he distinguished himself in Oran at the head of the Prince's infantry regiment, created at his and his father's expense, and returned to the peninsula, he carried out various commissions, and was later part, with the rank of infantry brigadier (December 27 1773), the same as Victorino de Navia and Luis de las Casas, from the unsuccessful expedition against Algiers in 1775, commanded by the Count of O'Reilly. The following year (1776) he joined his two cousins Juan Manuel and José Cagigal de la Vega y Martínez Niño, at the request of Pedro Cevallos, in the expedition to the island of Santa Catalina led by the latter, whose objective was to evict the Portuguese. of the establishments of the Río de la Plata. Having returned to the peninsula in July 1778, he was appointed commander of Ballesteros (order of Calatrava) on August 14, 1778, and entered the following year (1779) in the army of the Marquis de la Torre, which, after the hostilities ended, against England, he had to blockade the colony of Gibraltar.

Five months after sharing the horrors of that siege and being promoted to field marshal (June 1, 1779), he was sent to Cádiz with the Navarra regiment, destined to be part of the expeditionary army that, under the orders of Victorino of Navia, had to go to the aid of the overseas possessions, restless due to the war of independence of the United States. Before leaving, he marries María del Rosario Mata Linares. Arriving in Havana, after difficult navigation, on August 4, 1780, Cagigal, always in need of combat, found a way, to the detriment of another commander to whom it corresponded, to participate with his regiment in the expedition against Pensacola (Florida), coinciding again with his cousin Juan Manuel Cagigal de la Vega y Martínez Niño, who under the orders of Bernardo de Gálvez left the port of Havana on April 19, 1781. The intrepid Cagigal, the first to penetrate the breach in that square, after other acts of courage, was promoted to lieutenant general (on August 23, 1781 with an annual salary of 45,000 reales) and, wounded in one of his daring attacks, , returned to Havana in November 1782 to take possession of the captaincy general of Cuba, which, in an extraordinary commission, had been granted to him since February 12 of the previous year (1781).

Barely in possession of this job, his character not allowing him to be at peace, overcoming a thousand difficulties, he prepared an expedition to evict the English from the Bahamas archipelago. At the head of it he left Havana on April 22, 1782 with two thousand men in forty transports, and after taking New-Providence, Narbonne and other maritime enclaves of that archipelago, he managed to expel the British from all the possessions there. They occupied, taking possession of the castle and plaza of Nassau on May 7, whose garrison, a prisoner of war, was brought to Havana, leaving a Spanish one in its place. Fearing that the English under the orders of Lord Rodney would attempt an attack against Havana, which was devoid of defense, Cagigal decided to return to it promptly, and arrived in Matanzas very in time to prevent an English landing, which was already threatening the capital. . With the collaboration of the people, militias were organized, the defenses of the square were covered with weapons and parapets and several provisional fortifications were built with the help of a thousand blacks, also forming an entrenched field with the troops returned from Nassau. Rodney retired (August) after, cruising for a few days within sight of the coast, he found all the points where he threatened to land perfectly covered by Cagigal's activity.


Now free from all external anxiety, Cagigal, purely a soldier and not at all interested in administrative matters, wanted to attend to the internal well-being of his government; but for this, history declares him as incompetent as he was capable of commanding troops and assaulting fortresses: “Reading a file,” says a historian, “even seeing a manuscript paper, made him sleepy, and he was not very happy in government.” political". He completely handed over the dispatch of general affairs to his advisors and was captain general only to enforce the King's orders.

Among the men to whom he warmly gave his trust was a lieutenant colonel of the army of Navarra, a native of Venezuela, named Francisco Miranda (Caracas, 1750 – San Fernando (Cádiz), 1816), with whom he had had a close friendship for years. , a man later famous as a proto-independence activist.

Miranda actively intervened in the affairs of the time, such as the monetary relief sent to Rochambeau for the siege of Yorktown.

Having been sent on a commission to Jamaica to negotiate a prisoner exchange and on a spy mission, he exceeded his powers and compromised General Cagigal, loading the same schooner that took him to Kinsgton with contraband goods and sending them to Batabano, according to with several speculators from Havana, including Cagigal himself.

Cagigal and Miranda had many enemies and Mayor Uriza, hearing news of the event, denounced them to the Court of Madrid, accusing the captain general of maladministration and of “promoting smuggling” between that island and Cuba.


On December 29, 1782, Field Marshal Luis Unzaga arrived in Havana in charge of relieving him and sending him to Guárico (Santo Domingo), at the disposal of the Count of Gálvez, to be detained there by the regent of Guatemala, Antonio de Uruñuela. who, in accordance with the orders received from Gálvez, sent Cagigal to Cádiz, where he was confined in the castle of Santa Catalina. " its purity and disinterest being, however, indisputable.” Charles IV, to demonstrate his good will and his confidence in the notable soldier, told him to choose himself the job that he could perform from that moment on. And Cajigal, who had spent more than five years in prison for a false accusation, responded to King Charles IV in the best possible way, and replied that he did not want anything, he only wanted to fight for his country and give more glory to Spain, showing of sincere loyalty, selflessness and patriotism. Shortly after, he asked for leave to move to Madrid with half a salary, to defend his cause in the Council of the Indies, and the Madrid army was added on July 29, 1789. The process was very long with violent responses from Cagigal and was not resolved by the Council. of the Indies until 1799, giving a favorable ruling for Cagigal and Miranda, who for years had been abroad dedicated to his revolutionary work.


Shortly afterward the war against the French Republic broke out and Cagigal took part voluntarily and, despite his age, fought with his usual courage.

He was assigned to the army that gathered on the border of Irun, under the command of Ventura Caro.

He was a division member of the field army of the Eastern Pyrenees, participating in the battle of Perpignan (July 17, 1793), and shortly after he managed to be entrusted with the mandate of the vanguard division. Once the operations for the Peace of Basel were completed (1795), he requested retirement in Valencia with the rank of lieutenant general (1797), where he was governor and acting captain general in the absences and illnesses of the incumbents, Luis Francisco Urbina and Joaquín Fonsdeviela. . In 1799, alleging “notorious poverty”, he got the treasurer of the army of Valencia to advance him 30,000 reales and on February 6 of that year he joined the army that gathered in Mallorca for the reconquest of Menorca.

In June of that year he was appointed governor of Campo de San Roque, but he again requested retirement in Valencia (March 15, 1800), where he was still governor, captain general of the Kingdom and president of the Audiencia temporarily (1800), where The events of 1808 found him, enthusiastically adhering to the national cause. In summary, Field Marshal Juan Manuel Cajigal y Monserrate, lieutenant general of the Royal Armies, hero of the expedition to Algiers and the confrontation with Portugal in Buenos Aires, triumphant in Pensacola, conqueror of the Bahamas, glorious warrior in the campaign of Roussillon, winning six pitched battles, became one of the most brilliant Cuban military leaders of all time. He died in Valencia in 1808, at 75 years of age and “63 years of continuous service to the King and Country,” according to the obituary. from the Gazeta de Madrid of the following November 4.