Julián Manuel de Arriaga Rivera de San Martín and Duke of Estrada


Arriaga Rivera de San Martín and Duke of Estrada, Julián Manuel de. Segovia, 1700 – Royal Site of El Pardo (Madrid), 28.I.1776. Marino, Secretary of the Navy and the Indies.

Coming from a noble family, his father was alderman and perpetual mayor of Burgos. At the age of seventeen he was admitted as a Knight of Justice in the Order of Malta, in which two of his father's brothers had already professed. In this Order he reached the ranks and benefits of Commander of Fuente la Peña, Grand Cross and Baylio, for which he became known as Frey Julián de Arriaga, and he obviously died celibate.

After having passed the corresponding aptitude exams, he entered the Spanish Navy as a frigate lieutenant (May 6, 1728), embarking almost immediately in the Indies fleet under the command of the Marquis of Mari with which he returned with wealth to Cádiz ( August 18, 1730), to take part almost immediately in various commissions, both in the Atlantic and in the Mediterranean, in the successive jobs of lieutenant and frigate lieutenant. He embarked in the squadron of Lieutenant General Francisco Cornejo (June 15, 1732), participating in the reconquest of Oran, and, promoted to lieutenant (August 19, 1733), was under the command of Admirals Count of Clavijo and Gabriel de Alderete, and returned to Cádiz in 1734 to leave for the Pacific, visiting the Malvinas, Valparaíso and El Callao islands, and later, the Antilles and Costa Firme, with Rodrigo de Torres's squadron. On his return he was promoted to captain of the frigate (August 29, 1739) and carried out other commissions in Spain. Obtained a ship's captain's license (June 18, 1745), he was given command of the two-bridge Constante, with which he made two trips to Río de la Plata.

In order to organize the privateering through the Mediterranean, a naval division was coordinated with its ship, the same type of America, and four xebecs, of which Arriaga was given command (November 13, 1748), with powers to recruit and dismiss his own seamanship. In 1749 he was incorporated with the aforementioned ships to the expedition destined to quell the uprising against the Caracas Company in Venezuela, and once his mission in La Guayra was completed, he went to Cartagena de Indias and Havana, to later return to Cádiz, from where he marched to Cartagena to continue suppressing privateering by participating in various warlike encounters and capturing some Barbary dams.

From 1751, when he was promoted to squad leader, he began to carry out high-ranking tasks in the Administration, he was appointed Governor and Captain General of Venezuela, a position that he exercised with great success but for a short time, since the following year he held the position of mayor of the department of Cádiz and president of the Casa de Contratación (November 23, 1751), giving himself the peculiarity of becoming part of the body of the Ministry of the Navy, without ceasing to be part of the general body. During this period he displayed great activity in the application of the Forest Ordinance that he would later complete, collaborating intensely from Cádiz with the ship and xebec construction program of the Cartagena arsenal.

A convinced supporter of the policy of armed peace with England, by virtue of the Royal Decree of July 22, 1754, he took over from the Marquis de la Ensenada, also from San Juan, in one of the three secretariats that he had held before his sudden dismissal: the joint Navy and Indies, being promoted to lieutenant general the following year (May 20, 1755).

In this first ministerial stage, which began with the terrible earthquake of 1755 that devastated Cádiz and a good part of Andalusia, destroying numerous Navy facilities, he worked with great dedication in their reconstruction. As soon as the intensive shipbuilding policy of the previous mandate could be continued, it was carried out so actively that between 1755 and 1759 seventeen ships of the line and twenty-four frigates were launched. In the organic and administrative aspect, he made the criteria of the squad commanders prevail over that of quartermasters and auditors.

On the death of Fernando VI, Carlos III, whose transfer from Naples to Spain he organized, confirmed him in the secretariat at whose head he would continue until the end of his days, and named him a gentleman of his chamber and general superintendent of Azogues, despite not to have the sympathy of the influential Tanucci, the King's Neapolitan confidant, as Arriaga was a well-known defender of the Society of Jesus and not very prone to the royalist policy that was intended to be imposed, nor with that of the Marquis de la Victoria, general director of the Navy and brand new captain general, who aspired to obtain his ministerial position.

During the 1762 war, he promoted strong privateering armaments against English commerce in the Basque Country, Galicia and Andalusia, obtaining quite a few captures, but he could not prevent the loss of the Plaza de La Habana (August 12, 1762), together with that of the squadron of the Marquis del Real Transporte, sent to reinforce it, and in the East that of the Philippines, with the only warlike compensation being the conquest of the Portuguese colony of Sacramento.

After the conflagration ended, he organized the Council of War that severely judged the defenders of Havana who would later be pardoned by the King.

His became one of the longest-lasting mandates in the entire history of Spain (twenty-one years), remaining in it despite disagreeing with various important resolutions taken in this period, such as Spain's entry into the Seven Years' War and the expulsion of the Jesuits, the latter decision of which he was kept completely unaware until it was consummated and reaching the extreme of falsifying the dispatch of the warships in charge of transferring and escorting the deportees.

On the other hand, the frequent and tolerated meddling of Minister Esquilache, Secretary of the Treasury, in matters of the Indies, and the creation of the Maritime Post Office with the Indies (August 6, 1764), which intentionally avoided his double competence in favor of the Secretary of State, Grimaldi, are an example of both the courtly intrigues and the conciliatory spirit of the head of the Navy and the Indies, but they deserved the criticism of his hidden enemy, the Marquis de la Victoria, who called him a "corito corito y iclado" .

Starting in 1763, he carried out a policy of careful administration of the available resources in order to overcome the consequences of the defeat against England, managing to develop the Navy in sustained growth, although some important aspect was neglected, such as the formation of the officiality.

Once the friendly settlement of the disagreements with the Moroccan empire was decided, he appointed the squadron chief Jorge Juan to head the diplomatic mission that ended with the signing of a peace treaty (May 28, 1767) which, however, was breached in 1775 when the sultan tried to conquer the squares of Alhucemas, Peñón de la Gomera and Melilla, which could be saved thanks to the assignment of a naval division that kept them rescued and whose bombardments forced the enemy to raise the respective camps.

A good connoisseur of the Mediterranean privateering, he ordered the drafting and supervision of new ordinances aimed at promoting this activity against the English (February 1, 1762), and in order to reduce costs and standardize artillery pieces, ammunition and supplies of war that each King's ship had to carry, four years later he published others on these matters (December 31, 1766), perfected in 1772.

His activity to stop the attacks of the Algerians against Spanish commerce and the Mediterranean coasts was constant and yielded notable results thanks to two determining factors: the construction by the royal shipyards of new and large war hats and the personal promotion of a great sailor. practical, experienced in anti-corsair activity, Antonio Barceló, in front of those who did not want it because this naval chief did not come from the Academy of Marine Guards or be of noble origin.

The abolition in 1765 of the single port system of Cádiz, opening to traffic between Spain and America also those of Seville, Málaga, Cartagena, Alicante, Barcelona, La Coruña, Santander, and Gijón, increased American relations with the metropolis and the successive trafficking permits of 1768 and 1774, the trade between the various colonies.

La posición de Arriaga fue lo suficientemente firme para no verse alterada por el motín de Esquilache, como tampoco lo había sido por los reales o imaginados intentos por reponer al marqués de la Ensenada en la secretaría de Marina e Indias, que habían acabado con el segundo destierro de éste en 1766.

En ese mismo año, los ingleses se establecieron en Puerto Egmont (Malvinas). Tras diversas dilaciones y en virtud de instrucciones de Arriaga, el capitán general de Buenos Aires, Francisco Bucarelli, envió una escuadrilla de fragatas con un cuerpo de desembarco que desalojó a los intrusos (10 de junio de 1770), incidente que hubiera desencadenado la guerra de haber contado España con el apoyo de Francia; al no ser así, se tuvo que acabar transigiendo con la ocupación británica. Con objetivos comerciales y científicos y para evitar situaciones como la anterior, se llevaron a cabo en América nuevos reconocimientos geográficos e importantes trabajos hidrográficos desde el Río de la Plata al estrecho de Magallanes, en las islas de Pascua, Tahití, Chilo y en la costa de California.

Durante el mandato de Arriaga, España pasó a convertirse en una potencia naval pareja a Francia, abandonándose el tipo de fábrica de buques preconizado por Jorge Juan y de inspiración inglesa, para adoptarse el sistema en vigor en los astilleros franceses, para lo que hizo traer al constructor François Gautier, nombrándole director general de construcciones y carenas e inspector general del Cuerpo de Ingenieros de la Armada del que fue fundador (10 de octubre de 1770) con competencia no sólo referida a la construcción naval, sino a las obras en astilleros, arsenales, fábricas y conservación de montes. Se estima que bajo la dirección de Arriaga se botaron setenta buques de guerra, de ellos treinta y tres navíos, y se constuyó en el rehabilitado astillero de La Habana el de mayor porte de todo el siglo, el Santísima Trinidad, de tres puentes y dos mil ochocientas toneladas.

A partir de 1771, frey Julián de Arriaga pasó a formar parte del Consejo de Estado, lo que permitió coordinar mejor la política interdepartamental, como se puso de manifiesto en la importante convención firmada con Francia, que regulaba la navegación y la entrada y asistencia en las aguas y puertos de ambas naciones (7 de febrero de 1775). Al año siguiente, reglamentó la actividad de los arsenales, a través de las primeras ordenanzas sobre esta materia, separando las funciones gubernativas de las meramente económicas, quedando las primeras en manos de los capitanes generales y solventando así la acre polémica preexistente entre los cuerpos general y de Ministerio (22 de agosto de 1772). Meses después instituyó las juntas económicas de los departamentos y apostaderos, lo que pronto permitió el estudio de las necesidades mensuales de acopio de material y trabajos a realizar.

En el último año de su mandato se produjeron dos acontecimientos de la máxima relevancia: la decisión del traslado de toda la infraestructura de la Armada a una nueva población que en honor al Rey recibiría el nombre de San Carlos, y la frustrada empresa de Argel. En el primero de ellos correspondió a Arriaga la iniciativa, la planificación y la decisión con la que Carlos III se conformó; en el segundo, su responsabilidad resultó compartida con el resto del Gobierno y el propio Monarca.

Pese a sus grandes esfuerzos en los preparativos de la expedición que desde Cartagena debía conquistar Argel, tanto respecto a la escuadra destinada a protegerla como a los más de trescientos transportes que hubo que fletar, fracasada ésta y desterrado su jefe el general O’Reilly, algunas críticas salpicaron injustamente a Arriaga como responsable del aparato naval, quien murió con esta amargura seis meses después. A su fallecimiento se separó la secretaría de Marina, en la que le sustituyó Pedro González de Castejón, de la de Indias, en la que José de Gálvez fue su sucesor.

Probablemente la mejor materialización de todos los años del gobierno de Arriaga la constituyó el magno y ejemplar arsenal de Cartagena, prácticamente finalizado ese mismo año de 1775, una de las mayores empresas acometidas por la Administración carolina, con sus famosos diques de carenar y su gran hospital, quedando solamente planificado su cuartel de presidiarios.

También contribuyó al embellecimiento de la ciudad que lo albergaba.

El baylío Arriaga creó las denominadas “baterías doctrinales” para el entrenamiento y formación del que desde la gesta del castillo del Morro de La Habana se tituló Real Cuerpo de Artillería de la Armada (1763); reglamentó las dotaciones de los buques; creó e impulsó diversas escuelas náuticas; redujo la escasez de marinería mediante la recluta de marineros malteses y del Cuerpo de Batallones autorizando el ingreso de extranjeros católicos; modernizó los arsenales con machinas de arbolar, bombas de fuego y sistemas contra incendios y fomentó el desarrollo de las fábricas de filástica y de betunes. Por todo ello, puede ser considerado uno de los artífices de la recuperación naval del siglo xviii.

Según informes del embajador inglés W. Coxe a su gobierno, Julián de Arriaga fue hombre seco de carácter, por lo que carecía de amigos; muy severo en materias de disciplina, pero justo a la hora de premiar los merecimientos. De muchas de sus actuaciones se deduce un marcado afán por dulcificar las penas de los forzados destinados a los trabajos de los arsenales de Marina, respecto a los que suprimió la cadena y la llamada “prisión de seguridad”. La novedosa introducción de máquinas para el desagüe de los diques parece responder más a un rasgo humanitario, que a cualquier otro criterio de orden práctico, ya que con anterioridad el uso incesante de las bombas manuales era uno de los más agotadores trabajos.