Luis de Unzaga y Amezaga


Unzaga y Amezaga, Luis de. Le Conciliator. Malaga, 6.IV.1717 – 21.VI.1793. Captain General of Havana, first Captain General of Venezuela, Lieutenant General, Governor of Louisiana, of the coasts of the Kingdoms of Granada and Galicia, Knight of the Order of Carlos III.

Of illustrious family: nephew of the Marquis of Riscal de Alegre, Hurtado de Amézaga Unzaga, who was Governor of Malaga and Commander of the Order of Santiago; son of the warden of the Alcazaba de Málaga, Francisco de Unzaga-Amézaga Aperribay; grandson of the alderman of Bilbao, Tomás de Unzaga Gardoqui and great-grandson of the royal commissioner and paymaster of the Navy, Francisco de Unzaga Beraza; by his mother, grandson of Luis de Paniza-Ladrón de Guevara, captain of the coasts of Granada, and great-great-grandson of the philanthropist and founder of schools in Lombardy, Luigi de Paniza.

At only 13 years old, following the family example, he entered the Army as a cadet. He participated in the reconquest of Oran (1732) and until 1735 he did so in various missions in Italy. He departed (1740) from Guipúzcoa to America, during the War of the Asiento, fought (1741) with three frigates of the Guipuzcoana Company against two English warships. He collaborated in reorganizing the surviving troops, managing to constitute the Fixed Regiment of Havana; he was named (1744) war lieutenant of Baracoa and captain-governor of Puerto Príncipe (1747) where he rebuilt the church of La Merced. "In attention to his merit" he was elevated to commander (1753) in the same regiment, undertaking the reformation of its cavalry. As a lieutenant colonel, during the English siege of Havana (1762), he befriended the Irishmen Alejandro O'Reilly and Oliver Pollock, together they obtained provisions for the Spanish garrisons. Cagigal and Bucareli promoted him to colonel (1766) for his optimal management in the payment of salaries to the troops of his Santiago de Cuba Regiment, thus anticipating the Regulations (1767) that would regulate salaries.

He accompanied O'Reilly to Louisiana (1769) to reestablish Spanish rule after the expulsion of Ulloa in the Revolution (1768). There he presided over the New Orleans Cabildo until he was appointed titular governor of Louisiana (1770), whose population, of French tradition, was suspicious of the recent Spanish Administration. During this period he carried out urban reforms and had to tackle the great fire, decreeing fines for those who did not collaborate in extinguishing fires and setting safety guidelines.

His way of governing was conciliatory between Spanish and French interests, among others, releasing the leaders of the Revolution who were linked to Freemasonry from prison. He ordered agronomic studies and encouraged agricultural productivity, giving plots to new settlers of various origins and beliefs. With the promulgation of his Code (1770), which has been a pioneering legal reference, he reformed the administration of justice with the practice of detailed files that avoided inefficiency in trials and eased the abusive regulation in the acquisition of slaves, before the abolition full of slavery. He applied policies of peaceful relations with the Amerindians, thus making the economy of Louisiana (one third of the current United States) prosper, thanks to his permissiveness with free trade.

Within the Spanishization process and as an enlightened governor, Unzaga created in 1771 the first bilingual public education system in the world, in Spanish and French. He married (1775) the young Isabel, eldest daughter of the rich landowner Gilbert de Saint Maxent, a union that improved his relationship with French merchants. He knew how to reconcile the rivalry that arose between French and Spanish Capuchins.

After the arrival of British troops in the Thirteen Colonies to suppress the uprisings against the tax increase, Unzaga saw the need to secretly support the North American colonists in their Independence; for this, shortly before the Boston Massacre (1770), he began to draw up a network of spies to find out about the events: Tea Party (1773) and the siege (1775-76). Aware of the weak defense of Louisiana and the difficulty of helping the metropolis in case of war, he opted to reorganize his strategic positions, forming his militias and subdividing his extensive province, creating forts, such as Post Unzaga, that would serve of centers for the exchange of information and free trade. Military agents, merchants, Amerindians and even members of the clergy participated in the network, in addition to the espionage specialist Estachería who later, as director of the Military Academy, would train Bernardo de Gálvez, also from Malaga and future brother-in-law of Unzaga.

In April 1776 Unzaga was a pioneer in responding to requests for help from the American Continental Army, first, by giving refuge to several ships pursued by other British war vessels and by offering supplies to the Secret Committee via Pollock-Gibson; then, responding to the requests of General Lee, in May 1776, and to those of Patrick Henry, the founding father of the United States, who promised Luis that if he continued to help, Spain would find a faithful ally in the United States. . This is how Unzaga provided the first aid (tons of gunpowder, blankets, sanitary materials, uniforms, and flour) to the colonists, through the Mississippi and the Ohio to Fort Pitt, under the Spanish flag so as not to be detected by the English and by way of of his cousin Diego de Gardoqui, which allowed Washington its first victories.

In a reply letter to Charles Lee, on September 4, 1776, Governor and General Unzaga recognized him as a "general of the United States of America"; This expression by Unzaga, formulated in Spanish, was the first time that a government representative of a European power identified the US as an independent country and one of its generals as such and not as a mere leader of rebel troops. Unzaga's letter in which he offered to give the new nation all the help that was in his power, due to its flattering nature, was made known to General George Washington through his aide-de-camp Joseph Reed, so that General Unzaga became in inspiring the name of the United States of America, giving the support to use the term without putting Thirteen or Colonies before the name.

In 1776 Unzaga was entrusted with the creation of the General Captaincy of Venezuela, being temporarily replaced from January 1777 by the young Bernardo de Gálvez, almost 30 years younger than Brigadier Unzaga. Governor Unzaga accompanied Lieutenant Colonel Gálvez for several months, updating him on all the affairs of the great province of Spanish Louisiana, whose prosperous economy Gálvez knew how to maintain, despite the war situation, in the same line as his countryman. Bernardo de Gálvez became his brother-in-law by marrying Felicité Saint Maxent, sister of his wife Isabel.

On June 17, 1777, Unzaga arrived in Caracas, where, after breaking off territories from the Viceroyalty of Nueva Granada and merging them into Cumaná, Guayana, Maracaibo, Margarita and Trinidad, he became, on September 8 of that year, the first captain general. from Venezuela. Unzaga remained opposed to monopolies since they ruined small producers, having to appease various uprisings due to the collection methods of Mayor Ávalos on tobacco.

Unzaga, between 1777 and 1779, created the first two public schools in Venezuela, presided over the Board that examined the first pharmacists, similar to New Orleans, and supervised the engineer Crame in his Defense Plan for the Province of Caracas, a plan that he signed. (1779) the then field marshal Luis de Unzaga and who avoided the English provisioning, thus favoring the incipient USA; in fact Unzaga allowed North American ships to practice free trade with Venezuela during the war against England even before the Free Trade Decree (1781).

On December 10, 1782, he was appointed Captain General of Cuba, occupying the position in a key place and moment for World History, since from his privileged position in Havana and in coordination with the Army of Operations, led by Ezpeleta and later Gálvez, was able to continue managing material and military aid efforts in favor of the US Between 1783 and 1785 Unzaga received several requests from the founding fathers of the US, G. Washington and Robert Morris, to free trade with the US. Thanks to the intermediation of Unzaga with some bills of exchange from the bankers Le Couteulx, it was possible to pay the Continental Army, avoiding a rebellion in its ranks that would endanger the peace of the nascent USA with England.

In the intermission between the end of the war and the Peace Treaty of Paris (3.IX.1783), Luis and his wife Isabel, both with recognized diplomatic and conciliatory skills, received at their residence in Havana, with fireworks and other entertainment, the visit of Prince William of England, future William IV, who served to exchange prisoners and announce the preliminaries of Peace, exchanging the Bahamas for Florida and Unzaga ordering the Spanish ambassador to communicate the end of the war in the US and in the rest of the continent.

Unzaga's efforts, both in Louisiana and Venezuela, and later in Cuba and later in Malaga, transcended the military sphere, delving into the work of civil and political governor. In 1784, when the strong San Juan cyclone unleashed, he ordered enlightened orders, among them one to protect the extinction of cedars or the foundation of the Villa de San Antonio de los Baños for the affected families. In Cuba he also played a noteworthy role in relation to Francisco Miranda.

After 45 years on the American continent, at the service of the Spanish Crown, he returned to his native Malaga, leaving people he trusted in the main positions in America: his brother-in-law Gálvez in New Spain and at the Embassy in the United States. to Gardoqui.

In 1786 he held the political and military governorship in Galicia; between 1787 and 1793 that of the General Command of the kingdom of Granada and as president of the Junta de Reales Obras de Málaga, a city in expansion, he still carried out actions that allowed the city to structure and deal with its commercial flow. He died in Malaga, where his widow led an intense socio-cultural life, creating women's philanthropic societies and where her children will also play a prominent role in history.