Manuel Joaquín de Montiano y Sopelana

Montiano y Sopelana, Manuel Joaquín de. Bilbao (Vizcaya), 1685 - ?, s. XVIII. Military man, governor of La Florida and Panama.

Son of Agustín Montiano y Barco, deputy general of the lordship of Biscay, and María Teresa de Sopelana Lezamiz y Basagoiti. He followed the career of the arms, occupied the position of capitular alderman of Bilbao in 1717 and married in Fuenterrabía (Guipúzcoa) on April 25, 1725 with Josefa de Arriaga y Garaicoechea, with whom he had his daughter Francisca the following year.

After being widowed, he married years later with Gregoria de Aguiar y Aguiar, native of Havana, being parents of Manuel Josef Joaquín. He was assigned to Cadiz as captain of Grenadiers of the Aragon Infantry Regiment, reaching the rank of colonel. In 1737 he was appointed governor and captain general of the presidio and provinces of St. Augustine de La Florida, a position he held until 1749, rising to lieutenant general of the Royal Armies and finally to field marshal. His mandate was marked by the so-called War of Jenkins' Ear (1739-1748), between the fleets and colonial troops of Spain and England, being the border between Florida and Georgia the main point of friction between both empires. In St. Augustine he favored the settlement of blacks fleeing from slavery in the English colonies, free in exchange for conversion to Catholicism and service to the King, giving rise in 1738 to the fort of Gracia Real de Santa Teresa de Mosé, the first place in what is now the United States where blacks were able to live in freedom. In 1740 the British destroyed the fort, but St. Augustine Square withstood the bombardment and siege, a feat immortalized in an inscription on St. Mark's Castle. In 1742 he led the Spanish counterattack with an action on Saint Simons Island with troops made up of soldiers from St. Augustine, grenadiers from Havana and black militiamen. In the advance to Fort Frederica they were ambushed in the swamp by English soldiers, Scottish settlers and Yamacraw Indians on July 7, 1742. That date is still commemorated in Georgia as "Bloody Marsh" as the day the state avoided being Spanish. In 1749 he was appointed president of the Royal Court of Panama, governor and captain general of the Coasts and the province of Tierra Firme. His main mission was to guarantee the production of more than one million pesos in gold per year from the mines of the Darien. He had to fight against the serious problems in the area due to the scarce Spanish population and the fragility of the few existing forts: in 1751 the entire garrison of the fort of Terable was put to the sword and in 1758 the Indians set fire to the town of Javiza, always supported not only by the English, but also by the French.

That same year he was replaced by Antonio Guil y Gonzaga, who died after 1762.