Manuel de Godoy y Álvarez de Faria


Godoy y Álvarez de Faria, Manuel. Prince of Peace, Prince of Bassano, Duke of Sueca, Marquis (I) and later Duke (I) of Alcudia, Count of Evoramonte and Baron of Mascalbó. Badajoz, 12.V.1767 - Paris (France), 4.X.1851. Statesman.

Third son of José Godoy de Cáceres, of noble status, alderman of Badajoz and native of Castuera, where the second branch of the lineage of the Godoy family settled, whose original site was in Galicia, and of Antonia Álvarez Serrano de Faria, of noble status, with paternal ascendants from Elvas (Portugal) and maternal ascendants from Alburquerque. After studying Grammar and Arts at the San Antón Seminary in Badajoz, Manuel chose a military career. On August 17, 1784 he joined the 1st brigade of the Spanish Company of Corps Guards, which constituted the ordinary escort of the King and his family. It is not known for what reason he immediately entered the circle of the Princes of Asturias, Charles and Maria Luisa of Parma. The legend that has always accompanied Godoy maintains that everything is due to his condition of lover of Maria Luisa, but there are no solid arguments to support this opinion. It seems more plausible that everything was the consequence of a fortuitous accident that occurred in September 1788: during the escort of the princes of Asturias, Manuel fell off his horse, but his special skill in controlling it attracted the attention of the princes. Helped by the recommendation of Brigadier Miguel Trejo, first lieutenant of the Corps Guards and friend of the Godoy family, from then on Manuel was a regular at the get-togethers organized in the princes' rooms, whose confidence he immediately gained and grew. As soon as Prince Carlos occupied the throne (December 1788), Godoy rose rapidly in the Court and in the Army.

On December 30, 1788, he was promoted from simple guard of Corps to cadet; on May 28, 1789, he was designated exempt supernumerary of his company (equivalent to colonel of cavalry); on January 16, 1791, he was promoted to brigadier; on the following February 18, to field marshal, and on July 17, to sergeant major of Corps and lieutenant general. In less than three years he had gone through the military ranks, which culminated on May 23, 1793 when he was promoted to captain general. Only the very high degree of royal favor explains this portentous elevation, since he had not participated in any act of arms, nor had he performed any notorious service of any kind to the State. With the same rapidity he received honors and appointments in the Court. On January 5, 1790 he was made a knight of the Order of Santiago, on January 1, 1791 he was named gentilhombre de cámara de Su Majestad en ejercicio (a position that gave him direct access to the Monarch), on August 25 of that year he entered as a knight Grand Cross in the Order of Charles III and on April 21, 1792 Charles IV made him a Grandee of Spain, after granting him the title of Duke of La Alcudia, which had been preceded in the previous April by the marquisate of the same name.

The graces and honors received had their economic correlate. To his military salary he added in 1790 the rents of the encomienda of Valencia del Ventoso, of the Order of Santiago, and from April of 1792 his economic state experienced a radical change, after receiving from the King the meadow of La Alcudia. Together with new titles and graces, from this moment and until 1808 he accumulated real estate, urban real estate and rents of all kinds, product sometimes of royal donation (Soto de Roma), other times of exchanges with the King (Albufera de Valencia and lordship of Huétor de Santillán) and others of purchase, either from the King (lordship of Sueca), or from individuals (pastures in Extremadura and houses in Madrid, Aranjuez, El Escorial and Granada). Godoy became one of the most important jurisdictional lords of the Spain of his time and, in accordance with tradition, he founded two entailed estates in the style of the regulars of Castile: that of La Alcudia and that of Sueca. He was, at the same time, a zealous administrator of his assets, increased in 1797 thanks to the inheritance of his wife, the Countess of Chinchón. On the other hand, he took advantage of his high position to use state resources for his own benefit, to obtain valuable gifts and to buy books, jewels and works of art. His library and his collection of paintings by the great European masters were outstanding for their quality and quantity.

In 1792, Godoy came to the forefront of politics. On July 15 he was appointed State Councilor and on November 15 he entered the government as Secretary of State. The access of a young man without experience, training, or relevant services to the direction of the Monarchy's policy has given rise to very varied interpretations, some of which are picturesque. His many enemies, and above all those partial to the Count of Aranda, who constituted the so-called “aristocratic party” or “Aragonese”, alluded from the first moment to “unavowable reasons”, implying that everything derived from the love relationship between Godoy and the Queen. This explanation has been successful for a long time, but has been rectified by current historiography. Charles IV was dissatisfied with the way his Secretaries of State had conducted relations with France until then and, specifically, he was not satisfied with the actions designed to guarantee the survival of the Monarchy in that country and the personal fate of its King Louis XVI. , head of the House of Bourbon. Neither Floridablanca, the unifying force of the “golilla” or “manteísta” sector, nor Aranda, his substitute in the Secretariat and head of the other group – the “aristocratic party” – in dispute for power for some time, had achieved satisfactory results in this regard. , so Charles IV decided to personally take on the most serious issues. To do this, he wanted at the head of his government an individual he completely trusted, someone who was his “workmanship” (an expression used by Godoy in his Memoirs), who had everything, including his person, entirely dependent on him and who, furthermore, He did not have his own political plan or a group to rely on. Godoy met all these conditions and for this reason – supported by multiple proofs of personal loyalty already provided to the monarchs – he was elevated to the main position in the Government.


Despite his efforts, Godoy could not prevent the death of Louis XVI and the proclamation of the Republic in France, after which Spain joined the European monarchical coalition and went to war against the Revolution. The campaign began in the spring of 1793 with satisfactory results for the Spanish troops, but from March 1794 defeats came and the French army entered Spanish territory. The military setbacks and the general deterioration - especially economic - derived from the war created in Spain a state of critical opinion towards the public powers and, in particular, towards Godoy, whose continuity in the Government was objected to from different sectors. The “aristocratic party” was very active, but Godoy, protected by the unconditional support of the monarchs, was able to control the situation: he overcame the harsh offensive launched against him by the Count of Aranda in the Council of State, he controlled the count's attempt of Teba to organize the aristocracy against the current political system, he disrupted the so-called Conspiracy of San Blas and stopped Malaspina's maneuvers to remove him from power.

Once the war ended with the Treaty of Basel (July 22, 1795), Godoy promoted a radical change in relations with France, crystallized in the Treaty of San Ildefonso (August 18, 1796), which was an alliance agreement of a offensive-defensive expressly directed against England, as it contemplated Spain's neutrality in the event that powers other than it declared war on France. The alliance remained in force until 1808 and marked the foreign policy of the Spanish Monarchy, always aligned on the side of France, regardless of the political changes taking place there, and, therefore, confronted with England, a country against which it almost without a solution of continuity was in a state of war. The alliance with France had immediate positive effects for Godoy, who needed foreign support at that juncture to counteract the heterogeneous opposition from within. Furthermore, the Treaty of Basel brought a qualitative leap in his rise. In recognition of his performance, Charles IV distinguished him with the title of Prince of Peace (September 4, 1795). In accordance with the customs of the Spanish Monarchy, the title of “prince” was then reserved for the heir of the Crown (the Prince of Asturias), so that the new royal grace placed Godoy in a preeminent position at Court, for above the rest of the nobility. The new dignity, furthermore, was accompanied by the granting of the Soto de Roma and the right to add to their arms the image of Janus, the mythological god with two faces, a symbol—as the Royal Decree of granting expressly says—of the prudent man who he knows the principles and causes of the past and foresees the future. According to the royal will, Godoy would be, like Janus, wise, guardian of peace and promoter of civilization or “the Lights.”

The Prince of Peace did not have his own government plan. He acted according to the circumstances, especially the external ones, attentive, down to the detail, to the directives of the monarchs, with whom he maintained very close and frequent contact. Faithful to the King, Godoy adjusted his policy to achieve three main objectives: consolidate the Monarchy in Spain and the territorial integrity of its empire, avoid revolutionary contagion, and maintain Spanish dynastic interests in Italy (especially enlarging the territory of the Duchy of Parma ). The affairs of France focused attention and conditioned the rest. Godoy was above all a man of action, a born politician, who quickly learned the ways of the Court and adapted to the demands of the time, without having a problem changing systems when it suited him.

In internal affairs, he generally followed an enlightened reformist policy and on occasions attempted some major changes, such as the suppression of the Inquisition, although he did not decide to go all the way; He did not hesitate, on the other hand, to maintain the archaic customs of the Monarchy. Advised by a group of enlightened assets (Moratín, Llaguno, Forner, Melón, Estala...), he promoted teaching, the press, establishments and scientific expeditions; He sponsored literary creation, sometimes overcoming inquisitorial obstacles; He favored the dissemination of new economic ideas, such as those of Adam Smith, and the creation of organizations intended to provide reliable information on the material state of the Monarchy. Among other initiatives, with this last purpose, he created the Directorate of Development, a center for economic-statistical studies intended to advise the Government and from which large-scale proposals emerged, including the preparation of a population census (that of 1797) and the confiscation of the assets of hospitals, hospices, houses of confinement, foundlings and other pious works. At the same time, he maintained the provisions on the censorship of books and writings given by his predecessors and, perhaps because Charles IV prevented him from doing so, he did not decide to face the reform of the clergy and the Church, for which the enlightened sectors were insistently calling. more advanced.

In March 1798, Godoy was forced to leave the Government. The cause was not the loss of royal favor, but the confluence of two factors of a different nature. On the one hand, the leaders of France stopped trusting him, due to his refusal to support the Directory's plans regarding the invasion of Portugal and his unwillingness to follow French advice to introduce certain novelties into Spanish society. On the other hand, the rapprochement with France strengthened Godoy's internal enemies and increased those abroad, by implying a break with the rest of the monarchies committed to the fight against the revolutionaries and, in particular, with England, to which Spain declared war on October 4, 1796. The new conflict, which was much more costly than the one maintained years before against revolutionary France, required extraordinary tax measures, which fully affected the privileged, altered trade and relations with America. , and caused a serious financial crisis that seriously damaged the interests of merchants and rentiers. Responsibility for this crisis, as well as for the depravity of customs persistently denounced by the clergy, was attributed almost exclusively to Godoy. To overcome the situation, he called to the Government and to important positions in the Administration several of the most prestigious men of the Monarchy, such as Jovellanos, F. de Saavedra, Cabarrús, Meléndez Valdés, Urquijo, etc., and at the same time encouraged certain conspiracies in Paris aimed at bringing about political change in France. The attempt was unsuccessful: Cabarrús, Jovellanos and Saavedra formed a solid opposition front in the interior and the Directory, after controlling the internal opposition, launched a campaign of diplomatic pressure and political intoxication to force Charles IV to dispense with his minister. . On March 28, 1798, the King signed the decree dismissing the Prince of Peace as Secretary of State and Sergeant Major of the Corps Guards. In the first position he was replaced by Saavedra, who was soon succeeded by Mariano Luis de Urquijo, declared a personal enemy of Godoy.

Although removed from power, Godoy's personal contact with the monarchs was not interrupted, although his relations with Urquijo were stormy. Everything changed after the coup d'état of the “18 Brumaire” in France (November 9, 1799), when General Bonaparte put an end to the Directory. Bonaparte influenced Charles IV to dismiss Urquijo (he was replaced in December 1800 by Pedro Cevallos, a relative of Godoy) and entered into direct negotiations with Godoy to attack England from Portugal. On this occasion, Charles IV accepted the French plans and the invasion of Portugal by a Spanish-French allied army was agreed, of which Godoy would be the general in chief. In May 1801, without waiting for the arrival of French troops, Godoy began the military operations known as the War of the Oranges. The campaign was a success for the Spanish army, which in a short time mastered the Alentejo and was in a position to advance towards Lisbon. Godoy presented it as a personal triumph, exalted by the incorporation of Olivenza and his region into the Monarchy, and—with the consent of the kings—he took advantage of it to resolve his personal position in the Monarchy. At this point it was difficult for him to find a suitable place in the Spanish system, because in addition to surpassing all the King's subjects in titles and honors and his personal friendship with the monarchs, in 1797 he had become related to them by marrying María Teresa de Vallabriga, daughter of Infante Luis, brother of Carlos III. Under such conditions, he could not even satisfy the position of chief minister, since the Government's decision-making capacity was limited by other collegiate bodies and conditioned by multiple bureaucratic occupations. Godoy aspired to occupy a place in the Monarchy that would allow him to proceed, without hindrance, to his regeneration, as some of his loved ones expressly indicated to him. To achieve this, he considered it a priority to undertake the general reform of the army, hence the need for this position to have a military character. The title that fulfilled his aspirations was that of generalissimo of all arms of sea and land. As indicated in the decree of appointment (October 4, 1801), the new position was conceived as the highest position in the militia, with the broadest powers, so that everyone, regardless of their class, had to obey his orders as if they were. the King gave them. The generalissimo had - according to the aforementioned decree - the power to give his opinion to the Monarch "in military causes or in any other matters of his Monarchy", so, in short, he was placed above the Government, in an intermediate position. between him and the King, with the right to deal directly with the Sovereign on all matters.

From October 1801 to March 1808, Godoy was the axis of the Government of the Monarchy. From the King he received general directives or suggestions on important matters and he ordered their execution by means of the corresponding order to the ministers and high officials. In domestic policy, he did not change the enlightened plan of his time as Secretary of State and he did not alter the alliance with France, although his relations with Napoleon were always very strained, conditioned by mutual distrust. Napoleon tried to fully involve Spain in his European plans and gradually increased his demands: requesting help in weapons and men for the war in Europe, obtaining facilities to trade with the Spanish Empire and provision of silver for minting currency. Godoy tried without success to overcome these claims and also failed in his intention of not involving Spain in the Franco-British confrontation, after the failure of the Peace of Amiens (1802). Although he tried in 1803 to buy neutrality by paying a considerable sum of money to France (Treaty of Subsidies), he could not prevent war between Spain and England from breaking out again in December 1804. This circumstance accentuated Spain's military and diplomatic dependence on France and, apart from the military defeat at Trafalgar (October 1805), had very negative consequences on the internal order. The economic situation worsened, critical due to years of poor harvests and a recent yellow fever epidemic, which left the public treasury exhausted and accentuated the commercial crisis that had been going on for years before, which led to the closure of factories and the increase in production. unemployed population. Social discontent became widespread and, although it did not manifest itself ostensibly publicly, Godoy was pointed out from all sides as the person most responsible for the evils.

Protected in this environment, a group determined to put an end to Godoy began to gather around the Prince of Asturias, Fernando. It was made up of aristocrats related to the old “Aragonese party” and some clerics. This group (known as the “fernandino party”) was led by Canon Escoiquiz and had the enthusiastic collaboration of the first wife of the Prince of Asturias, María Antonia of Naples, who through her mother, Queen Carolina, was in contact with England. In 1806 the princess died, and France annexed Naples, so that relations between Godoy and Napoleon became more strained than ever. This led to a change in tactics by the “Fernandine party” which, through the French ambassador in Madrid, François de Beauharnais, tried to gain the support of Napoleon. Confident in having this, the “fernandinos” launched a major offensive against Godoy. Firstly, they orchestrated a discredit campaign, in which through rumours, satirical prints and publications of all kinds, Godoy was presented as the embodiment of all vices and the culprit of Spain's ills. They then hatched a plan to convince Charles IV to remove Godoy from office and try him for his misdeeds. This plan—known as “the El Escorial conspiracy”—was discovered in October 1807. After Prince Fernando's confession, those involved were arrested, but what could have seemed like a triumph for Godoy, resulted in his detriment, as public opinion He believed that everything had been concocted by the generalissimo to prevent the accession of the prince of Asturias to the throne. This belief was fueled by the last royal favor received by Godoy: his appointment, on January 3, 1807, as grand admiral of Spain and the Indies, with the right to receive the treatment of highness.

Elevated to an incredible level of power and honors, Godoy believed that he could contain the offensive of his enemies from the interior thanks to the support of Napoleon, hence in 1807 he strove to satisfy his demands and, among other concessions, concluded the Treaty of Fontainebleau (October 27, 1807) for the joint military occupation of Portugal. This agreement established the division of Portugal into three parts, one of which, the Alentejo, would be governed by Godoy as prince; Likewise, it made it possible for French troops to enter Spanish territory, something that began to occur at the beginning of 1808. While the French army was occupying strategic points on the Peninsula, Napoleon presented a new demand: the transfer to France of the territory located between the valley of the Ebro and the Pyrenees. Godoy refused and, realizing the seriousness of the situation, tried to organize resistance, for which he proposed the transfer of the kings to Andalusia. Prince Fernando and the entire Government were categorically opposed to this and, at the same time, the “Fernandino party” organized a plot, under the guise of a popular revolt, to take Godoy prisoner. On the night of March 17, 1808, the inhabitants of Aranjuez and people from neighboring towns recruited for the purpose attacked the Godoy palace. He managed to escape from the crowd by hiding in a corner of the building, but on the morning of the 19th he was forced to leave and was taken prisoner. That same day Charles IV abdicated in favor of Ferdinand VII. The new king quickly ordered the confiscation of all of Godoy's assets and the opening of legal proceedings against him. After a little more than a month in prison - in Aranjuez, Pinto and Villaviciosa de Odón successively - Godoy was released by order of Napoleon and transferred by French troops to Bayonne, where the emperor had also summoned Charles IV and Ferdinand VII to force them to renounce the Crown of Spain.

After the events in Bayonne, Godoy began his exile, which would be definitive, accompanied by his lover Josefa Tudó and the two children he had with her, as well as by Carlota, the result of his marriage to the Countess of Chinchón, who remained in Spain and She never joined her husband again. Until the death of Kings Charles IV and Marie Louise (January 1819), he remained in their company as a faithful servant to the extreme and ruler of a ghostly and decadent court subject to the designs of Napoleon and installed successively in Compiègne, Aix-en. -Provence, Marseille and, since 1812, in Rome. From 1814 onwards, Godoy suffered intense harassment by the agents of Ferdinand VII and was forced to separate from the kings for a year - from September 10, 1814 to October 7, 1815 he lived in Pesaro - and from Josefa Tudó. . Although he was unable to dispose of his real estate, during his stay in Rome he made some real estate acquisitions and purchased the principality of Bassano with the aim of becoming a Roman citizen and escaping the persecution of Ferdinand VII. In 1829, after the death of the Countess of Chinchón the previous year, he married Josefa Tudó in Rome, a city from which they both left on January 17, 1830 to settle in Paris. Encouraged by Tudó, he tried the business route and bought two houses in Paris and a sugar refinery near Le Havre. Soon, however, he had to sell everything to pay debts. Godoy's standard of living gradually worsened and his family relationships followed a similar path: he broke contact with his daughter Carlota due to financial disputes and in 1835 he definitively separated from Pepita Tudó, who settled in Madrid to activate the claim for the assets. from her husband. Busy with the education of his grandchildren, Godoy maintained a dark life in Paris, obsessed with saving the honor of Charles IV and his own as ruler, and with achieving the lifting of the kidnapping of his property. On April 30, 1837, a resolution of the Ministry of Finance ordered the return of his assets and the restitution of all his titles and honors, except that of Prince of Peace, and ten years later he was authorized to return to Spain and receive the pay corresponding to his employment as captain general. The return was not possible due to illnesses typical of his advanced age, but he did achieve the satisfaction of vindicating his honor through the publication of his Memoirs in 1836. He died in Paris and was buried in the Père Lachaise cemetery in that city. where his remains remain in a modest tomb.