Mariano Luis de Urquijo y Muga


Urquijo and Muga, Mariano Luis. Bilbao (Vizcaya), 8.IX.1768 – Paris (France), 3.V.1817. Politician and statesman.

Member of a family that held various jobs in the Administration (his father, Francisco Policarpo, was mayor of Casa y Corte and councilor of Castilla and his brother, Rafael Eugenio, held diplomatic posts in Europe), he began his studies at the College of Escolapios from San Antón in Madrid, the city to which his parents moved in 1777. He continued his training in France and graduated in Law at the University of Salamanca, where he was taught by Juan Meléndez Valdés and was a classmate of Manuel José Quintana.

After a brief stay in England, he practiced as a lawyer in Madrid and frequented the gatherings of literate people, including that of the Countess of Montijo, a meeting place for prominent representatives of the so-called Spanish Jansenism and a major cultural focus at the time. . In October 1791, he published, under his name, a verse translation of Voltaire's tragedy La mort de César, preceded by a “Preliminary Discourse by the Translator on the Present State of Our Theaters and the Need for Their Reform”. In keeping with neoclassical tastes, Urquijo criticized the popular Spanish authors of the time (Zavala, Valladares, Nifo), as well as Calderón and Shakespeare, and declared himself an admirer of the French (Corneille, Molière) and of classical units. Likewise, he advocated for a broad reform of the theater, to turn it into a "public school of politics, of eloquence, of good taste and of right thinking." Although he did not expressly defend Voltaire's philosophical ideas, his work immediately drew the attention of the Inquisition. A trial was opened against him, but thanks to the protection of the Count of Aranda, he did not suffer serious consequences. In the corresponding "charge hearing", he was accused of slight suspicion of sharing philosophical errors and was acquitted ad cautelam, with the obligation to perform some spiritual penance in secret. The work was banned, but the fact that the author's name did not appear in the prohibition edict indicates the scope of political protection that Urquijo benefited from.

His administrative career was fast-paced and very promising from the start. On August 17, 1792, a few months after the appointment of the Count of Aranda as the first Secretary of State, the young Urquijo, about to turn twenty-four years of age, entered that Secretariat as ninth official, last place in the ranks, with the following recommendation: "he is a young man of skill, he follows the law career and is very adept at extracting files well, whose talent is not common in the Secretariats". Five months later, the new Secretary of State, Manuel Godoy, promoted him to sixth officer, on March 21, 1794 he became third officer and on June 10 of that same year to second officer. The dispute, however, within the Secretariat between the employees called "lawyers", that is, those who came from the University —a sector to which Urquijo belonged— and the "career" ones (those who had carried out missions abroad ), moved Godoy to dispense with some of the officials of the Secretariat, including Urquijo, but he was not unemployed: he was appointed secretary of the Spanish Embassy in London, without losing his position in the Secretary of State. This decision was interpreted by Urquijo as a hostile act by Godoy and from then on he became one of his direct enemies.

The state of war between Spain and England forced Urquijo to leave London in October 1796 and settled in Paris. At the beginning of January 1797, he returned to Madrid and on October 27 of that year Godoy called him back to the Secretary of State as second major officer and soon after he was promoted to first officer. Urquijo once again held a key position in the Spanish Administration, at a time when Godoy, harassed by the French Directory and by the Spanish sectors opposed to the Enlightenment, surrounded himself with a very prominent group of men of letters (Jovellanos, Francisco Saavedra , Cabarrús, Meléndez Valdés, etc.).

After Godoy's dismissal as Secretary of State on March 28, 1798, Francisco Saavedra held that position, but he fell ill and, by Royal Decree of August 13, 1798, Carlos IV empowered Urquijo to carry out his functions "putting in the pre-signature that he does so due to the indisposition of Mr. Francisco Saavedra”. The following October, Saavedra's health was restored and Urquijo was appointed extraordinary envoy and plenipotentiary minister in The Hague, a post he did not occupy, although he nominally retained it until December 31, 1800. On February 21, 1799, after Saavedra's new relapse in his illness, Carlos IV put Urquijo for the second time in charge of the Secretary of State, now without putting in the countersignature that he exercised due to Saavedra's indisposition. Until his dismissal, on December 13, 1800, Urquijo was the Secretary of State of the Spanish Monarchy, always acting as an interim.

His performance at the head of the main Secretariat was controversial. His friend García de León y Pizarro recognizes in his memoirs Urquijo's great capacity to understand the issues inherent to that position and his enlightened spirit, both extremes in which historiography agrees, but at the same time he stands out —as many of his contemporaries did. Urquijo—his lack of maturity, his extreme external vanity and his excessive lightness in his relationships and in the expression of his feelings. Although personally confronted with Godoy, he followed the basic political lines set by him, consistent, with regard to the interior, in favoring the development of Enlightenment projects and, in foreign affairs, in maintaining a close alliance —never exempt from bilateral conflicts— with France, continue the opposition to England and defend the dynastic interests of the Spanish Royal Family in Italy. Urquijo's imprint on his passing through the post was especially noticeable in religious politics. His main support as ruler was the "Jansenist" sector, that is, the group in favor of creating a national Church based on the model of the early days of Christianity, poor, free from the ties of the Roman curia and governed by an episcopate. endowed with broad powers. Urquijo, however, maintained a more radical attitude than the "Jansenists", because while they emphasized the reform of religiosity and the internal organization of the Church, the minister, guided more by political than religious criteria, aspired to fundamentally to emancipate the Spanish Catholic Church from the authority of the Roman Pontiff.

In 1799, when Pius VI was at death's door, Urquijo tried to obtain a pontifical brief that would empower the Spanish bishops to grant certain graces until then reserved for the Pope (especially in matters of marriage dispensations), as well as a subsidy on a third of the income of the bishoprics. Pius VI did not agree to the first point, the one related to episcopal faculties, and limited himself to approving a subsidy of thirty-six million reales for the clergy in Spain and thirty for that of America, much less than what was requested. However, after the death of the Roman Pontiff, Urquijo got Carlos IV to sign a decree on September 5, 1799 by which the King attributed to the Spanish ordinaries the ability to grant dispensations, especially matrimonial ones. This decree has been considered the culminating point in the struggle between Spanish regalism and the Roman curia and constituted a serious obstacle in the relationship between the Spanish Monarchy and the Holy See. Along similar lines to that of the French republicans, Urquijo appeared as the minister who had managed, for the first time, to place the authority of the King of Spain above that of the Spanish Church. In the opinion of the sectors opposed to the Enlightenment, this act led to schism, while the "Jansenists" interpreted it as finally overcoming the obstacles of the Roman curia to proceed with the reform of religion and the Church. . Recent historiographical contributions qualify one interpretation and the other and consider that Carlos IV never thought of a break with Rome, but agreed to Urquijo's proposal because he believed that the Holy See would remain vacant for a long time and tried to retain in Spain the important economic sums paid to Rome for marriage dispensations. As regards Urquijo, the decree was, above all, a political weapon against the European powers and a kind of intimidation against the cardinals gathered in conclave in Venice to guarantee an election favorable to Spain. On March 29, 1800, only fifteen days after the election of the new Pope, Pius VII, Carlos IV repealed the decree and then returned to the traditional state in relations with Rome.

In 1799, Urquijo adopted other decisions that likewise caused a kind of general alarm in the Spanish Church. He dismissed the members of the Court of the Inquisition of Barcelona, after some disputes over competences, withdrew the nuncio's status as ambassador of the Holy See and facilitated the circulation in Spain of a letter in which the Spanish "Jansenists" were encouraged to comply his programme; this text had been drafted by members of the French Constitutional Church, among them Grégoire, the author a year before of a letter to the Inquisitor General Arce in which he requested the end of the Inquisition. All this was a serious setback for Urquijo, because, apart from the animosity towards him from a large part of the Spanish clergy, a fact that had a decisive influence on Carlos IV, motivated the Pope to write to the Monarch in terms that were not very favorable to his minister. On the other hand, after the coup of 18 Brumaire in France, Urquijo's relations with the first consul Bonaparte became very strained. Protected by all this, Manuel Godoy, allied with the sector opposed to Urquijo, did everything possible to influence the spirit of Carlos IV so that he dismissed Urquijo, which occurred on December 13, 1800.

Urquijo was immediately appointed postal administrator in the town of Bilbao on December 12, 1800. This was a hard blow for him, since he was kept away from the Court and, consequently, from the center of power, but his many Enemies went further and tried to prosecute him on charges of embezzlement of public funds and complicity with French diplomats in the signing of the Treaty of San Ildefonso on October 1, 1800, which agreed to return La Lusiana to France and of the island of Elba, as well as the delivery to this country of six warships and a sum of money in exchange for the enlargement of the Duchy of Parma. On March 7, 1801, Urquijo was arrested and, although the process against him did not prosper, he remained confined in the citadel of Pamplona until March 5, 1802. On that date he was allowed to leave prison, with the obligation to fix his residence in a town in his province, and he chose Bilbao. In 1804, the protagonists of "la zamacolada" turned to Urquijo and Admiral Mazarredo as mediators before the public powers. Although both were in favor of maintaining order and controlling the popular movement, they were not spared from being accused of instigating the rebellion. The judges in the case found no reason for their prosecution, but both were forced to live outside the lordship of Vizcaya, Madrid and the Royal Sites. Urquijo settled in Burgos, where he remained until March 1808, when Fernando VII lifted his banishment.

In April 1808, Urquijo was one of those who tried in vain to dissuade Ferdinand VII from his trip to France to meet Napoleon. On May 25, after the resignations of Bayonne and once José I had been designated King of Spain, Napoleon called Urquijo to that city to take part in the Assembly destined to provide the Kingdom with a new Constitution. Urquijo acted as first secretary of the so-called Junta de Bayona, which was chaired by Miguel José de Azanza. Before the opening of the sessions, Napoleon consulted Azanza and Urquijo about the most important political measures to be applied in Spain. Urquijo submitted a report on June 5 in which he demonstrated his openness to new political ideas. Among other proposals, he suggested the immobility and independence of the judges, the separation of civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the abolition of feudal rights, the confiscation of the assets of the military orders, the creation of a civil registry, the replacement of officials military by civilians in the administration of the Monarchy, the abolition of alienated and privileged trades and the suppression of the Inquisition. Napoleon paid little attention to this report, but Urquijo won the will of José I, whose personal adviser he became and over whom he exercised great influence.

From July 7, 1808 to June 27, 1813, he was a member of the government of José I as Minister of State, a newly created position in the organization chart of the Spanish Administration, whose mission was to guarantee communication between the King and the other ministers. , maintain unity among the ministries and prevent any of them from standing out above the rest. The Minister of State had to endorse the laws, royal decrees and acts of government and was obliged to accompany the King at all times, particularly in the Council of State and the Privy Council, in which he had a voice without a vote.

In 1809 he was declared guilty of high treason by the Cortes of Cádiz and his property was confiscated. In compensation, as happened with other afrancesados, he received from the government of José I the sum of 1,200,000 reales. On the other hand, Urquijo notably increased his patrimony by acquiring disentailed urban and rustic goods in different parts of Spain controlled by José I.

In August 1812, he followed Joseph I to Valence (France). He returned to Madrid, with the King, on November 3 and definitively left Spain, together with the Bonapartist government, after the battle of Vitoria on June 21, 1813. Initially settled in Pau, in 1814 he settled in Paris and naturalized French. After Napoleon's abdication, he congratulated Ferdinand VII on his return to the throne and requested a pardon for him and for those who had been his collaborators, without obtaining a response. He died in Paris in 1817 of indigestion that the doctors could not stop and was buried in the Père Lachaise cemetery, where his friends placed an ornate funerary monument with a laudatory inscription about his life path.

He was a knight of the Orders of Carlos III, Malta, Saint John of Jerusalem and of the Golden Fleece. He did not get married.