Martín Díaz de Mayorga y Ferrer


Díaz de Mayorga y Ferrer, Martín. Barcelona, 12.IX.1721 - At sea, off the coast of Cadiz, 28.VII.1783. Field Marshal.

Son of Brigadier Martín Díaz de Mayorga Sorripas, captain of the Spanish Royal Guards, and Manuela Ferrer y Pou.

He joined the Regiment of the Spanish Royal Guards, where he was promoted to ensign in 1735. He was then assigned to Italy, where he took part in the sieges of Tortona, Piacenza, Parma, Pavia, Alexandria, Valencia del Po, Asti and Milan.

On his return to Spain, when he was already first lieutenant of riflemen, he was promoted to captain of riflemen, according to the Madrid Gazette of 25 September 1753.

On January 17, 1760 he married Josefa Valcarcel y Daoiz, former chambermaid of Queen Barbara de Braganza, at the Royal Palace of Buen Retiro in Madrid.

He attended the campaign of Portugal, participating in the siege and capture of the square of Almeida, on August 25, 1762.

According to the Madrid Gazette of March 11, 1766, he was named governor of the square of Alcántara and promoted to brigadier of Infantry on April 3, 1766.

He was awarded the Order of Alcántara that same year.

By Royal Order of May 11, 1772 he was named captain general of Guatemala and president of its Royal Court. He left Spain on March 12, 1773 and arrived on June 12 to his capital, and that, a few days after establishing Diaz de Mayorga, suffered a terrible earthquake, on the 29th of that month, which almost totally destroyed it, so it was decided to move the city to a new location.

For his activity in that government he was promoted to field marshal, according to the Gazette of July 30, 1776.

He repeatedly requested leave to return to Spain, which was finally granted on January 22, 1779, but the sudden death of the viceroy of Mexico, Antonio María Bucareli, on April 9, 1779, and the opening of the corresponding providence appointed him as his successor, so he had to change his plans and go to Mexico, whose government he took possession of on the following August 23.

During his government, war was declared against England, and he decreed that urgent repairs be made to the fortifications of Acapulco, the fort of Perote and Veracruz, as well as the adjustment of the veteran troops and militias, in which he had serious disagreements with the inspector general Pascual Jiménez de Cisneros.

As a consequence of the war and the considerable increase of the army and navy troops stationed in the Caribbean, he sent more than twenty-four million pesos to Havana for their maintenance. Apart from these shipments, he had to face the demands of other captaincies, such as those of Yucatan, the Philippines and Louisiana, not only of the situado but also of extraordinary aids.

He also sent to Havana, in March 1782, the Regimiento Fijo de la Corona, in order to reinforce the garrison of that plaza.

On April 28, 1783, he transferred his government to Matías de Gálvez and embarked in Veracruz bound for Havana, where he boarded the frigate Santa Clotilde, bound for Cádiz. He died at sea, in sight of that city, on July 28, 1783.