Matías Gálvez y Gallardo

Gálvez y Gallardo, Matías. Macharaviaya (Málaga), 24.VII.1717 - Mexico City (Mexico), 3.XI.1784. Governor and Captain General of Guatemala and Viceroy of Mexico.

Coming from a humble family although with resources, soon he could make a fast social ascension thanks to the successes of his brother José, who would become visitor in New Spain and later minister of the Indies.

He was the first-born of the brothers and was baptized in his parish, his godparents being Alonso Carrión and María del Pino. In 1745 he married María Josefa de Madrid, from whom Bernardo de Gálvez, future Count of Gálvez and conqueror of Pensacola, was born on July 25, 1746.

He entered the Army, where he quickly distinguished himself for his military qualities. He was appointed governor of the fortress of Paso Alto in the Canary Islands (Tenerife) at the end of the 1760's, being promoted to lieutenant of the King. Already as captain of the Artillery Corps of the Canary Islands, he requested the nobility for him and his brothers. Named inspector of troops, he was transferred to America to take charge of his first major political job as governor and captain general of Guatemala, replacing Martín de Mayorga, who had repeatedly requested the transfer. The official appointment took place on March 1, 1778, and he immediately marched to his new destination, where he arrived in July of the same year.

On April 4, 1779 he took official possession of the Audiencia of Guatemala, although it would still take a month to become fully effective. He carried out an enormous work of military character, forming diverse bodies of Cavalry and Infantry militia in diverse localities like Santa Ana, Tegucigalpa or Comayagua.

He installed the offices of the Mint in the new city of Guatemala, which was moved after the old city had been destroyed by an earthquake in 1773. On July 25, 1782, he laid the first stone of the cathedral, whose first architect was Manuel Ibáñez. He devised, together with his brother José, the plan to level Lake Nicaragua with the waters of the Pacific to prevent flooding. The architect and engineer Miguel Galisteo was called for this work, but he finally rejected the ambitious project, declaring it technically unfeasible.

The difficult international situation that Europe was going through was soon reflected in the Indies. Rumors of war with England were constant and it was evident that a new conflict would break out sooner rather than later. As a seasoned military man, he foresaw the confrontation and organized an army to defend the territory under his command before the possibility of it becoming one of the theaters of operations. In the same way, he ordered a general map of Central America to be drawn up.

When the war broke out in 1779, his plans proved to be successful. His son Bernardo obtained a resounding success against the English by expelling them from Mobila and Pensacola, but he was no less, since he conquered the fort of San Fernando de Omoa on November 28, 1779, as well as the castle of the Immaculate Conception of the San Juan de Nicaragua River. In 1781 he was promoted to Field Marshal and in 1782 he took the island of Roatan. Returning immediately to the coast of Honduras, he defeated the English again, expelling them from the coasts and conquering the forts of Quepriva and Criva.

On August 14, 1782 he had been named Matías as interim viceroy of New Spain, undoubtedly, his maximum political aspiration and to which his brother José, at that time minister of the Indies, had strongly helped. He left pertinent orders to his successor, José de Estacherría, and left for his destination in March 1783. After passing through various towns and receiving great signs of affection, he arrived at San Cristóbal de Ecatepec on April 28, where his predecessor, Martín de Mayorga, came out to meet him to give him the command. He immediately left for the capital, Mexico City, where he would enter on April 29.

By Royal Decree of August 14, 1783, José de Gálvez was informed of his brother's inauguration as viceroy of Mexico, president of the Royal Audience and superintendent of the Royal Treasury, with a salary of 60,000 pesos per year. On May 7, Matias received the news of the preliminaries of the peace with the English, which would finally be signed on September 3, 1783. The new viceroy, however, was not sent the government instruction that was customary, so he had to choose to carry out his mandate in a direct manner and without previous instructions.

He had confrontations with the Audiencia for jurisdictional reasons, something very common when it came to defending his own prerogatives. Upon the death of the bishop of Linares, Antonio de Jesús Sacedón, there was a strong dispute between the viceroy and the Audiencia over the matter of the goods left by the deceased, or expolios.

It was necessary to resort to the Council of the Indies to mediate in the dispute and to give the reason to the viceroy as the only member with power over those goods.

In the summer of 1783 he made a visit to the Tribunal de la Acordada, where more than eight hundred prisoners were being held. He made a meticulous inspection of the dungeons and took an interest in all its rooms, even congratulating its director, Antonio de Santa María, for the good work he had done. On the occasion of an Indian rebellion in the jurisdiction of Cuayacocotla, Matías went so far as to request from the judge of said court the use of two hundred armed men under the command of the interim inspector Francisco de Crespo to proceed to put down the rebellion.

He showed great interest in the cleanliness and conservation of the streets, bridges and irrigation ditches of the viceroyalty's capital, dictating various measures for their improvement, such as the construction of several new sewers.

He ordered the paving of San Francisco Street, one of the most important streets in the city. To meet the inevitable expenses of these public measures, he introduced a tax on pulque. Finally, in view of the poor reception and the fact that even less was collected, he had to eliminate the new tax.

In the same direction he tackled the problem of the drainage of the lagoon of Mexico, with the idea of making an efficient and fast use of the canalizations. For this measure he was advised by various engineers.

He paid great attention to military matters, which had given him such good results during his time as head of the Government of Guatemala. He carried out personal inspections of the gunpowder factory in Chapultepec, examining its quality and encouraging the construction of a new factory in Santa Fe. He modified the old viceroyalty custom of recruiting young men to serve in the King's Fixed Regiment, which usually served in Manila, considering it unpleasant and degrading, since it was common to commit all kinds of abuses when recruiting. He abolished this system on November 2, 1783, introducing a more rational recruitment system.

He also took care of the cultural progress of New Spain by providing official protection to the School of Drawing from the moment of his arrival. Thanks to his efforts, he obtained an authorization from the metropolitan government to create the Royal Academic Preparatory Board, which began its sessions in the Royal Palace on July 25, 1783.

He tried to provide the capital with a complete lighting system that was also very profitable, since it prevented nighttime crimes to a great extent. He initiated the project by means of a proclamation on November 6, 1783, although it would have to wait until his death for it to actually be carried out.

In order to achieve a better distribution of the meats and other provisions of such a populous city as Mexico, he gave timely orders to avoid the shortages that were detected during the previous war, by means of proclamations published on June 28 and September 13, 1783.

On November 22, 1783, he granted license to the printer Manuel Antonio Valdés to publish a Gazette similar to the one that at that time was already operating in Madrid and other European capitals, in which only official news coming from the government itself should appear, and the publication of news about the attacks of the Apache Indians, very common in the north of the viceroyalty, but which tended to cause unrest among the population, should be avoided.

Matías informed the Court of the need for this publication, as it would be very useful for the knowledge of ships entering or leaving the ports of the viceroyalty.

Once peace had been signed with the English, it became necessary to reactivate the postal system, something that occurred after receiving the order from Madrid dated September 21, 1783. On December 11, 1783, he visited the gunpowder factory in Santa Fe, about three leagues from the capital, which he himself had encouraged in order to avoid dependence on Spain in this regard.

The promotion of the mining industry, fundamental source of the viceroyalty's wealth, and from which not only the metropolis but also many other Caribbean enclaves drank, was a cause for concern in Matías' government. Knowing the news from China that rich mercury mines had been found, it was thought possible to bring fifteen quintals of this mineral, so necessary in the extraction of silver, from Canton every year. However, although the project was launched and certain quantities of mercury arrived from Manila and Canton, it was found to be very dirty and hardly worthwhile for its ultimate purpose, so the idea was abandoned soon after.

In 1784 he sent a project to King Charles III in which he emphasized the increase of troops in the Nuevo Reino de León and in the colony of Nuevo Santander, since these territories were traditionally very problematic from the point of view of defense due to the permanent uprisings of the local Indians. His idea was to reinforce the defense of these territories in order to make the installation of new settlers who could exploit the rich lands in the surrounding areas more secure. The consolidation of these enclaves was vital to avoid future depredations by the enemies of Spain. His death prevented the implementation of this idea during his term of office, although it would be in the years to come.

On March 12, 1784, he received from Charles III the Royal Order officially creating the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, which had previously been recommended by the superintendent of the Royal Mint, Fernando José Mangino. Matías endowed it sufficiently, granting it an annual budget of 9,000 pesos from the general treasury, plus another 4,000 from the temporalities occupied by the expelled Jesuits. Its statutes were approved after the viceroy's death, although he laid solid foundations for this to happen quickly.

At the end of April 1784, the construction of the Orizava bridge was completed, which allowed fast and safe travel from Mexico to Veracruz. Although its expenses were paid by the pedestrians themselves, the viceroy made the necessary moves to make its construction possible without delay. In June, he published several decrees aimed at improving the conditions of the Gañan Indians, who were living in deplorable conditions.

On July 1, and following a previous decree of February 18, 1784, he established in the capital the Monte de Oficinas, founded with the idea of helping and protecting the widows of the employees in the escribanías de Cámara de las Reales Audiencias and other similar offices, a measure that extended beyond the capital.

By means of a bando of July 17, 1784, he suppressed gambling, of which he was a known enemy, not only in the flag houses, but also in all public places.

The government of Matías Gálvez meant a notable improvement for the Mexican coffers, which saw their income increase from more than nineteen million pesos in 1783 to almost twenty million only a year later.

The viceroy's health, who had been in poor health since his government in Guatemala, worsened considerably in the autumn of 1784. In October, the archbishop of Mexico requested that prayers be made in all the churches of the Archbishopric for the viceroy's prompt recovery. However, on October 20, and before the notorious worsening, Matías delegated the functions of the Royal Audience so that the many pending legal questions would not remain unresolved, since he did not want the administrative machinery to be hindered by his illness.

He finally died two weeks later, on November 3.

Since the shroud sheet could not be found, the day after his death Vicente Herrera, regent of the Audiencia, was named as interim in the position.

He was buried on November 8 in the church of the apostolic college of San Fernando, in the midst of a great military paraphernalia, as he had disposed in his will.