Pedro Pablo Abarca de Bolea and Ximénez de Urrea


Abarca de Bolea and Ximénez de Urrea, Pedro Pablo. Count of Aranda (X). Siétamo (Huesca), 1.IX.1719 – Épila (Zaragoza), 9.I.1798. Military, diplomat, politician, businessman.

He was born into an illustrious noble family. His father, a native of Zaragoza, Pedro Ventura de Alcántara Abarca de Bolea, was the Marquis of Torres, Duke of Almazán and Count of Almunias, titles to which he would add in 1723 that of IX Count of Aranda.

His mother, María Josefa López de Mendoza, Pons y Bournonville, a native of Barcelona, was the daughter of the Counts of Robres and the Marquises of Vilanant. There are a total of twenty-three titles of nobility that the X Count of Aranda would inherit. He received his first education in Zaragoza at the hands of the Jesuits for whom his mother had special affection and devotion. At the age of nine, his father, who was going to Italy to take command of the Immemorial Regiment of Castile, took him to Bologna. In 1734, he took him out of there and entered him in the College of Nobles of Parma run by the Society of Jesus, where he appears in the alphabetical list of students of the decade 1730-1740 as “D. Dux de Almazán, ex magnatibus Hispaniae primae classis, Petrus Paulus, Caesaraugustanus”.

In 1736, at the age of seventeen, he ran away from school to report to the Spanish army in Italy. In this way, the then Duke of Almazán (a title that he carried until January 1742 as the eldest son of the House of Aranda) was able to go on to fight alongside his father with the task of rescuing for the infant Carlos —future Carlos III— the Duchy of Parma. However, the Peace of Vienna (1737) ended up assuring the Infante Carlos the crown of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, with which the Count of Aranda was able to return to Spain. His son, the Duke of Almazán, would follow him some time later, after completing his studies in humanities and military art. Thus, he was able to meet his wife Ana María del Pilar Fernández de Híjar, daughter of the VIII Duke of Híjar and Grandee of Spain, whom he had married by proxy (1739) having acted as proxy, on behalf of the groom, the brother of the girlfriend, Joaquín Diego, IX Duke of Híjar, eldest son of the Pignatellis and brother of the Jesuits San José and Nicolás.

At the age of twenty-one, the young Aranda (1740) was appointed captain of the Grenadiers of the 1st Battalion of the Immemorial Infantry Regiment of Castilla (after King) of which his own father was a colonel.

Simultaneously, Felipe V granted him the rank of colonel of infantry in attention to the merits and manifest inclination to military service. War declared again in Italy, the young duke embarked in Barcelona (1741), and his father having died two months later, he was given command of his regiment. At the head of it, he participated in the Italian campaign under the orders of Montemar and then Gages. Colonel Aranda was wounded in the battle of Campo Santo (1743) in which the Spanish faced the Austrians. There, he remained for twenty-four hours among a pile of corpses until he was saved by his assistant. Felipe V then granted him the job of brigadier of the Army, as a reward for his heroic behavior.

Aranda returned to Spain to recover, and once recovered from his injuries he returned to Italy until the end of the campaign, participating in the battle of Plasencia (1745) and shortly after in Fidone or San Lorenzo, and in the sites of Larrabal, Tortona, Valencia del Po and Casale de Monferrato. In reward for these services, Felipe V granted him (1746) the title and key of gentleman of the Royal Chamber. The following year, when Ferdinand VI was already reigning, he was appointed field marshal. The Peace of Aachen (1748) offered new horizons to the activity of the Count of Aranda.

The following years he averaged between the administration of his possessions, residing in his house in Zaragoza, and a series of trips that he undertook through France and central Europe in order to enlighten himself and increase his knowledge of military and artillery.

París, Bruselas, Berlín, Postdam —donde estudió la táctica militar del ejército prusiano— Dresde y Viena fueron diferentes etapas de su viaje. Paralelamente, enriqueció su pensamiento económico en la línea cameralista, al igual que los economistas aragoneses de la época, y en el papel que debía desempeñar la nobleza militar, comerciante y política. Visitó fábricas, factorías y centros comerciales, especialmente en la ciudad alemana de Meissen, famosa por su porcelana, en la que recabaría fórmulas y métodos para mejorar su fábrica de loza y porcelana de Alcora. Fruto de estos encuentros fue el contrato que poco después hizo con el alquimista y arcanista de dicha ciudad Juan Cristian Knipffer, quien se obligó a fabricar porcelana fina durante seis años y a enseñar sus técnicas a los aprendices de Alcora.

Cuando Aranda volvió a España en 1755, continuó su carrera de ascensos militares. Ese mismo año —contando sólo treinta y seis años de edad— era promovido a teniente general. Pocas semanas después, Fernando VI le confió la embajada extraordinaria de Lisboa, que el día de Todos los Santos había sufrido un terrible terremoto y destruido la mayor parte de la ciudad causando unas ocho mil víctimas, entre ellas el embajador de España, conde de Peralada, que falleció mientras oía misa en la capilla del palacio de Calhariz, sede de la embajada española, que quedó completamente arruinado e inhabitable. La dureza de ésta, su primera experiencia diplomática, la reflejó Aranda de forma gráfica y crítica en la correspondencia mantenida con su tío el duque de Alba, por lo que muy pronto pidió ser reemplazado.

La breve estancia de Aranda en Lisboa fue premiada por Fernando VI (1756) con el collar de la insigne Orden del Toisón de Oro. Ese mismo año, Aranda era nombrado director general de Artilleros e Ingenieros y coronel del Regimiento de Artillería. La supresión del empleo de capitán general de Artillería, y la fusión de los cuerpos de Ingenieros y Artillería fueron mal recibidos, no sólo por el secretario del Despacho de la Guerra, Sebastián Eslava, sino también por algunos capitanes generales, como el marqués de la Mina, que lo era de Cataluña, y protegido de Eslava. Razón por la que Aranda encontró desde el primer momento un rechazo manifiesto al que siguieron serios disgustos y contratiempos cuando quiso poner orden, especialmente en las maestranzas y fundiciones, donde se encontraron verdaderos fraudes, como pronto puso de manifiesto al dar cuenta del mal estado en que se encontraba la artillería.

En consecuencia, Aranda prestó especial atención en vigilar las fundiciones y la fabricación de la pólvora y el calibre de las balas. Organizó la artillería en cuatro departamentos: hizo un estudio del estado de todas las plazas, acuartelamientos y fortificaciones de la Península, fundó en la Corte la Real Sociedad Militar de Matemáticas —integrada por ocho ingenieros y artilleros encargados de preparar un curso matemático-militar que incluyera las materias precisas para un buen oficial ingeniero o artillero— y unificó las múltiples y diferentes escalas empleadas en mapas, cartas y planos.

Íntimamente ligado al mundo de la ingeniería estaba el de la arquitectura, y Aranda expresó sus inquietudes arquitectónicas a través de la Real Academia de Nobles Artes de San Fernando, de la que fue nombrado consiliario. Con este motivo envió a la Academia una curiosa Memoria sobre el método de la enseñanza de la arquitectura basado en tres principios: firmeza, hermosura y comodidad, que analiza pormenorizadamente.

In view of the fact that his relations with Minister Eslava did not seem to be mending, Aranda was discouraged to the point of confessing that, with such an accumulation of oppressions, he had lost the spirit of the Army. Consequently, on January 24, 1751, he raised a Memorial to the King in which he requested not only his removal from the position of director general of Artillery and Engineers, but also the Army itself. Double resignation that was accepted immediately four days later.

Aranda retired to his lands in Aragon and there he remained administering them until the new King, Carlos III, arrived in Spain in October 1759, who, on his way to Madrid (he had disembarked in Barcelona) stopped for some time in Zaragoza. What happened in the capital of Aragon between Carlos III and Aranda, who undoubtedly came from Épila to greet the new king, is still not clear. But shortly after (March 1760), the King reincorporated him into the Army with the rank of lieutenant general and the same salary and seniority that corresponded to him according to his first patent of appointment abolished and now rehabilitated. A couple of months later, he was appointed extraordinary ambassador to the King of Poland and Elector of Saxony, Augustus III, Charles III's father-in-law. While Aranda was visiting the city of Dantzig, in his capacity as ambassador, the Family Pact (1761) was signed.

The first years of the reign of Carlos III registered an open confrontation between Spain and Portugal, derived mainly from the different policy of alliances maintained by both countries. After war was declared and in view of the unfortunate performance of the Spanish army, led by the Marquis of Sarriá, the Count of Aranda was urgently summoned, who left the Polish Court to lead the Spanish army in Portugal. The hostilities with Portugal that cost Spain some twelve thousand casualties, ended in a draw in the chess of the peninsular territorial conquests, the most serious being the loss of Havana conquered by the English after the assault on the Morro castle. The Peace of Paris (1763) put an end to the Seven Years' War, considered the first world conflict of modern times.

That same year, a royal decree ordered a military court, chaired by the Count of Aranda, to examine and judge the military conduct of Juan Prado, Governor of Havana, as well as that of other senior officers in charge of the defense of the island of Cuba against the English attack. After a year of deliberations, the court sentenced those responsible to death, although the King spared their lives.

During the course of the process, the Count of Aranda was promoted to the position of Captain General; he was then forty-four years old. As a result of the Treaty of Versailles, Spain recovered Cuba, the main commercial and military enclave of the communication routes between Hispanic America and Europe. In exchange, Great Britain received the Florida peninsula, until then an integral part of the General Captaincy of Cuba. Spain, in turn, increased Louisiana with the extensive area then belonging to France. From that moment on, the island of Cuba became for Aranda the center of his colonial concerns, and Lieutenant General Ambrosio de Funes y Villalpando y Abarca de Bolea, Count of Ricla, first cousin, was appointed to the highest political government of Cuba. of the Count of Aranda and a year younger than him, with whom he had taken part in the campaigns in Italy and in the war in Portugal. During the two years that his mandate lasted, the fortresses that surrounded Havana were rebuilt, new ones were built, and the island's politics and administration were reorganized. Ricla followed the meticulous plan drawn up by Aranda, who selected the most capable and trustworthy staff to carry it out.

While still busy in the sessions of the Military Junta, Aranda received the appointment of captain general of the kingdoms of Valencia and Murcia, whose captaincy had been left vacant by the death of Manuel de Sada y Antillón. At the same time, he was appointed governor of the kingdom of Valencia and president of its Audiencia. These appointments were considered, however, as an ostracism, since the Marquis of Esquilache, who was reaching the height of his privatization, did not want to have anyone close to him who could overshadow him. The result of his brief stay in Levante was his concern to improve the proper functioning of the Valencian Court, the regulation of the water service, the suppression of abuses committed due to local immunity, the repression of laziness, the inspection of barracks and maritime defenses, and the colonization of Monte de las Águilas, in Murcia and foundation of the homonymous city of Águilas.

Barely a couple of years later (1766), as a result of the riots against Esquilache, Aranda was called back to Madrid, constituted as president of the Council of Castilla, replacing Bishop Rojas, to bring order to the Villa and Court of the that the King had fled taking refuge in Aranjuez. For this reason, he was also named captain general of Castilla La Nueva.

The famous riot against Esquilache —to which, in reality, the name “riots” should be applied more because of the repercussions it had in Zaragoza, Cuenca, Palencia, Lorca, Elche, Barcelona, Salamanca, Murcia, La Coruña, Azpeitia and many other points of the Peninsula, up to more than a hundred- was used by the Duke of Alba, together with Father Osma —King's confessor—, Grimaldi, Roda and Campomanes, to persuade the Monarch, if he needed persuasion, to act against the Jesus company. This is the moment when Aranda enters the scene. One of the most publicized consequences of the riots was the expulsion of the Jesuits (1767) accused in the Campomanes Prosecutor's Opinion of being their cause. Today it is known, thanks to the papers that Campomanes kept in his family archive, who were the true architects of the expulsion, and the main one of them, Campomanes himself, who did not hesitate to manipulate the evidence with false witnesses, and who handled at will the Extraordinary Council keeping its president, the Count of Aranda, suspected of partiality in favor of the Jesuits, isolated. However, Aranda would historically carry the role of said expulsion being the last to know. His role was limited as supreme magistrate of the kingdom and general commander of the Army and Police, to putting into practice a resolution that was being prepared in Madrid some time before he was called to the Court. Aranda acted as a strategist, who contributes and develops a well-conceived plan —secret and simultaneous in its implementation— and in which he took care of even the smallest detail, such as the tobacco and chocolate that the expelled could take with their belongings; the number of religious who had to go in each carriage or carriage; looking for teachers to replace them, so that classes in schools would not be interrupted for a single day. Or if you prefer, he acted as the executioner whom the judge summons to come on the eve of an execution, according to a contemporary expression of Las Casas, Spanish ambassador in Venice.

But, in addition, in the seven years (1766-1773) that he was president of the Council of Castilla, he displayed a wide variety of activities. Thus, he intervened against the many ecclesiastics who, abandoning their parishes and residences, found themselves in the Court with no other job than to request benefits and perks, forcing them to return to their respective canonical domiciles. He forbade and chased the cloud of beggars, vagabonds, and thugs that infested the streets of Madrid. The General Instruction for the lighting of the Villa and Court is owed to him; he divided Madrid into eight quarters with their neighborhoods each, and demanded that the corresponding mayors comply with the norms related to the conservation of lighting, cleanliness and cobblestones; he created the popular institution of the night watchmen, and that of the deputies and trustees of the common people, with a view to supplying them and greater control of the municipalities; he organized masked balls at the Príncipe and Caños del Peral theaters in Madrid; he ordered the construction of the theaters of the Royal Sites of Aranjuez, El Escorial and La Granja as experimental theaters; he took part in the creation of the current Madrid Botanical Garden, as well as in the layout of the Paseo del Prado; he favored writers like Iriarte, Cadalso and Fernández de Moratín, and painters like Mengs and Bayeu, among others.

In 1769 Aranda left Madrid to spend a couple of months in his possessions in Épila, a town in Zaragoza where both the parish church and the three existing convents were the foundation of the Aranda family. From there he also became interested in his fine earthenware factory in Alcora, one of the most important and renowned of the time, being the first industrialist in Spain to implement paid retirement among his workers. Shortly before his return to Madrid, the University of Huesca awarded him the highest degree in the Faculty of Law and commissioned Ramón Bayeu to paint a portrait of the Count of Aranda for this reason.

Upon his return to Madrid and passing through the Royal Site of San Ildefonso, the King appointed him an extraordinary advisor to the Committee set up to understand the political problem posed by the Malvinas Islands, and a member of the Board in charge of planning the "Unique Contribution Plan ”, which would not come into force. However, despite so many appointments and responsibilities, the friction and confrontations of the President of the Council with Grimaldi and the prosecutors Moñino and Campomanes worsened. These were joined by many ecclesiastics and some nobles of greatness who wanted Aranda's fall, especially as a result of the implementation of the Beneficial Plan for the churches of Spain that sought the somewhat revolutionary beneficiary arrangement of Spain and that led to Aranda having to bear the odiousness that not a few people paid to the reforming president.

Around those same dates, the colonization of Sierra Morena and especially the actions of Olavide revealed, once again, the confrontation between Aranda and Campomanes. The humiliation that Campomanes suffered for this reason led to the revenge of the prosecutor who continued, day after day, torpedoing each of the presidential initiatives or activities. Another incident that contributed to increasing the animosity against President Aranda, this time in the person of Grimaldi, and the King himself, was Aranda's refusal to enter the Order of Carlos III.

The so-called “Aragonese party”, a term coined by the historian Coxe and later developed and studied by Olaechea, was none other than Aranda and a few supporters related to him and his way of thinking on political, administrative, economic and cultural issues. And it constitutes one more chapter of Aranda's interest in control of the power of the Court and the ministerial struggle that especially faced "Aragonese" and "golillas"; that is to say, to a pressure group of a noble-reformist tendency (Aragonese party) against the collaborators of Carlos III's policy (“golillas”). And among these, especially, Campomanes and Moñino, the two prosecutors of the Council of Castilla, who raised (1772) to the King a reserved exhibition against the president of the Council, Aranda; exhibition that in a certain sense was the response to the Memorial that a year before Aranda himself had addressed to the King against Campomanes and his professional irregularities. But in this confrontation the big loser was Aranda, who ended up being displaced from the Presidency of the Council and assigned to the brilliant ostracism of the embassy in Paris, where he would remain, practically in exile, fourteen years (1773-1787) before being able to return to your contry.

Aranda replaced his son-in-law, Count de Fuentes, eldest son of the Pignatelli, in Paris. However, in Paris, Aranda continued to be a special victim of Grimaldi's policy, who kept his ambassador out of the most important and delicate matters. In fair correspondence, Aranda did not hide the little sympathy he felt for the Genoese, not only because of a spirit of political xenophobia in which the Duke of Villahermosa, ambassador of Spain in the Court of Turin, also participated, but also because he considered him a minister inept and lazy and strongly disagreed with his pro-French policy.

Aranda's military streak was again revealed during his embassy in Paris on the occasion of the disastrous Spanish expedition to Algiers (1775) led by the Irishman O'Reilly. Gibraltar and the Sacramento colony also focused the attention and interest of Aranda, who on several occasions offered to go to the battlefield. But where he was most directly involved was as a result of the war of independence of the Thirteen American Colonies, due to his personal intervention in the Versailles Peace Treaty (1783) between Spain and England, focused on the recovery of the island of Menorca and of eastern Florida, although Gibraltar was finally left out before the intransigence of England. Aranda celebrated the signing of the treaty by having himself photographed by Inza in a monumental equestrian painting in which he collects in a lower cartouche the satisfaction of King Carlos for the services rendered by Aranda for this reason. The peace negotiations were complicated by the attitude of Floridablanca —who had already replaced Grimaldi in the direction of the affairs of Spain— manifestly at odds with the Government of England.

The rebellion of the Thirteen Colonies awakened in Aranda, once again, the fear that South America would escape from the hands of Spain following the example of the North; a foreshadowing of what was coming had already been the revolt of Tupac Amaru, bloodily put down. In this sense, he sent Carlos III a secret report in which he expressed his fears, just as he had done before in the "Government Plan for the Prince" (1781), which he sent to Asturias, where the attitude is clairvoyant. that in the future the United States would have with respect to Spanish America.

Aranda, who had left his wife in Spain, believed that the time had come to request his return, even if only briefly, to meet her, who was seriously ill with no hope of cure. Before Aranda arrived in Madrid, he learned of the death (December 24, 1783) of his beloved Ana María del Pilar. Aranda, who had seen his three children and his only male grandson die, was left without heirs, and in the hope of finding someone to continue his lineage and house, he did not hesitate to marry again, taking advantage of his stay in Madrid. And he did it just a few months after burying his first wife (1784) with her seventeen-year-old great-niece María Pilar Fernández de Híjar y Palafox. Aranda was then sixty-five years old.

Leaving aside the topic of his alleged friendship with the watchmaker Voltaire and the encyclopedists, and the anecdotes related to his appointment by the King of France as Knight of the Holy Spirit, or the refutation he made of Figaro's Journey to Spain that managed to was burned in Paris at the hands of an executioner, as well as his support for the creation of the Royal Aragonese Economic Society of Friends of the Country in Zaragoza, and the first Scientific Museum in Paris, finally, on the eve of the French Revolution, Aranda obtained authorization for his final return to Spain (1787). From that year until the end of February 1792, when Floridablanca was dismissed, he did not hold public office again. However, with his return, and despite this political "absence", the deaf and then relentless war that the military-Aragonese party carried out to overthrow Floridablanca intensified, precisely as a result of the Junta de Estado constituted to the detriment of of the authority of the Councils.

The death of Carlos III on December 14, 1788 and the accession to the throne of Carlos IV marked a notable change. The fall of Floridablanca, the exoneration of the ailing and almost blind Campomanes, the rise of the young Godoy, the increasing influence of Queen María Luisa culminated in the appointment of Aranda (1792) as dean of the restored Council of Castile and first secretary of State.

Aranda's political activity, in this his last period, focused on the difficult international situation raised by the French Revolution, which would eventually lead to the declaration of war between Spain and the French Convention, better known as the War of the Pyrenees. (1793-1795), and that both in the preliminaries and in its development, served for the count to once again reveal his deeply rooted military spirit. Despite the different memorials and campaign plans drawn up by Aranda and his frontal opposition to a war for which he believed that Spain was not prepared, and from which they could not derive any advantage, but rather damage, both peninsular and American, led to a harsh personal confrontation with the valid Godoy and with Carlos IV himself that resulted in the immediate dismissal of Aranda (1793) first as Secretary of State, then as dean of the Council of Castilla, as well as his exile to Jaén, seizure of of all his papers, solitary confinement and subsequent trial and imprisonment in the Alhambra.

Finally, in 1795, he was allowed to retire to his house-palace in Épila, where he lived dedicated to the administration of his possessions and to collaborating with the Royal Aragonese Economic Society of Friends of the Country, until his death (1798), at the age of seventy-eight years. His corpse, at his express wish, was transferred and buried in the Royal Monastery of San Juan de la Peña (Huesca).

The House and title of Aranda passed to that of Híjar and later to the House of Alba, which is the one that today holds the title of Count of Aranda.