Tomas de Iriarte


Iriarte, Tomás de. Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife (Santa Cruz de Tenerife), 18.IX.1750 – Madrid, 17.IX.1791. Fabulist, poet, playwright, translator and literary polemicist.

Tomás de Iriarte was born in 1750 in Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, into a family made up of his parents, Bernardo de Iriarte and Bárbara de las Nieves Ravelo, and his brothers Bernardo, Juan Tomás, Domingo and José. In 1760 he went to La Orotava, a circumstance to which he would refer years later in Notes that a curious person asked D. Thomás de Yriarte about his life and studies, which he dated July 30, 1780: “Ten years after his At that age he went to the town of La Orotava to study the Latin language under the teaching of his brother Fray Juan Tomás de Iriarte [...].

Tomás lived inside the convent and in the cell of his brother and his teacher. At the end of two years, or a little less, he was translating Cicero, Virgil, Ovid, etc., quite well, and was composing Latin verse with liking and pleasure as much as his age of twelve allowed.

In 1764 he went to Madrid, requested by his uncle Juan de Iriarte, a scholar dedicated to his tasks in the Royal Library and translator of the Secretary of State, as well as a member of the Royal Spanish Academy (1747) and the Fine Arts Academy of Saint Ferdinand (1752). His uncle, an excellent connoisseur of Latin and a skillful (albeit uninspired) versifier in that language, dedicated the years of his old age to training and promoting his nephews Bernardo, Domingo and Tomás in diplomacy and letters. Under his watchful eye, Tomás de Iriarte learned French and English, perfected Latin, began in Greek, studied and cultivated music (he played violin, viola and bandolin), translated Latin and French works, and did extensive reading on rhetoric and poetic art.

Bernardo de Iriarte, his older brother, had prepared a report on theater reform for the Count of Aranda in 1767, who commissioned him to retouch some works of the golden theater according to the rules of taste.

In the same direction, Tomás de Iriarte would translate from 1769 titles by Destouches, Voltaire, Gresset, Molière, Champfort, etc., generally in prose, which he did not include in the Collection of works of 1787, where he did include the only two translated into verse. : The Orphan of China, by Voltaire, and The Married Philosopher, by Destouches.

He also did not include his comedy Hacer que hacemos there, published in 1770 under the alias Tirso Imareta, and whose immaturity can be attributed to the earlyness of his writing (1768). In the prologue with which he heads it, he specified the purposes pursued in his writing: absence of affectation, clear and credible entanglement, configuration of a character, commitment to instruct while delighting. He also intervened in the theatrical controversy between reformists, around Moratín Sr., and casticistas, defenders of the model of Ramón de la Cruz, in whom Iriarte saw the sum of evils that afflicted the theater of his time.

When Juan de Iriarte died in 1771, Tomás filled his vacancy as a translator in the Secretary of State. His growing importance led him to the direction of the monthly newspaper Mercurio Histórico y Político (1772), a position from which he resigned before he was one year old. His activity diversified between the translation of plays, the preparation for printing of the Latin Grammar and the two volumes of his uncle's loose works (1771 and 1774 respectively), and the writing and publication of Los literatos en Cuaresma (1773). ), hidden behind the pseudonym D. Amador de Vera y Santa-Clara.

His social activity made it easier for him to deal with various families of the nobility, and with literary personalities such as Nicolás Fernández de Moratín or Cadalso. To the latter he directed, between 1774 and 1777, his epistles in verse I, II, V and XI (Collection of works, 1787). When Cadalso retired to Salamanca, after the death of his beloved Filis (María Ignacia Ibáñez), he maintained a juicy correspondence with him, which manifested the affection between them and the complaints about their respective worlds: the scholastic foolishness of Salamanca in the face of the noisy pettiness of Madrid's literary life. In “Epístola I”, of November 11, 1774, Iriarte reflects the stupidity of the court world, undoubtedly to alleviate the isolation of Cadalso, who was in Montijo at that time: “And no matter how melancholy it gives you / lack of this literary world, / I would exchange luck with you, / and in Montijo I would live solitary, / where I would treat simple farmers, / and not idiots prized by doctors.

In 1776 Tomás obtained the position of General Archivist of the Supreme War Council. At that time he became a regular at the Fonda de San Sebastián, where Italian and Spanish men of letters met.

In 1777 he published his version of Horace's Arte Poética, in hendecasyllables with some heptasyllables, which more than doubled the number of hexameters in the original.

Iriarte wanted to excuse himself for putting a work that had been translated several times into Spanish, and criticized the translation by Vicente Espinel, praised by López de Sedano in the first volume of his Spanish Parnassus (1768). In the "Preliminary Speech" Iriarte pointed out Espinel's incompetence, but he ended up recklessly attacking the compiler Sedano: "[...] although I don't know if it is Espinel's own fault, or one of the many mistakes that can be seen in the edition published by its translation has been made in the Spanish Parnassus”. Sedano replied in the ninth volume of his Parnassus (1778), where he crossed out Iriarte, not without reason, as “extensive, widespread, and redundant” in his translation. Iriarte replied that same year in his dialogue Donde las dans las tamanas, where he mercilessly attacked Sedano and his chaotic Parnassus, which destroyed the prestige of the meritorious company encouraged by Antonio de Sancha, as indicated by the fact that this volume was the last. .

His Enlightenment ideas and his attacks on the temporal power of the Church (romance “Simón's Boat”) led, in August 1779, to a cause of the Holy Office that ended negatively for Iriarte, although without too serious consequences. Months earlier, in May 1779, he had completed his didactic poem Music, which he published in a richly illustrated edition at the end of that year. The poem, in which Iriarte tried to adjust an artistic discipline that was lacking in his century to a canon, has a very calculated structure and is articulated in five songs: general considerations, affections and passions expressed through music, temple music, theatrical music, music in private amusements or in solitude. The work, whose harmony sometimes suffers from his teaching intention, had great publishing success, and was soon translated into English, French, Italian and German. Among the praise poured out on her in various countries, Iriarte always boasted of the letter addressed to her by the elderly Metastasio, who reputed him as one of the few authors “quos æquus amavit Iupiter”.

In Spain, however, the critical fortune was uneven, and García de la Huerta, Samaniego, Jovellanos or Forner made fun of his alleged defects.

Of all Iriarte's literary quarrels, which poisoned his life and distracted him from strictly creative tasks, perhaps the one that mortified him the most originated in the poetry contest convened by the Royal Spanish Academy on country happiness, which the young man won. Meléndez Valdés with his eclogue “Batilo”. Iriarte's eclogue, "The happiness of country life", presented after the pseudonym of Francisco Agustín de Cisneros, had to settle for being "the one that comes closest to the one that won the award", as specified on the cover of the edition paid for by the Academy (1780). Hurt by the ruling, Iriarte had his Reflections on the Eclogue entitled "Batilo" (only edited in the posthumous edition of his works, in 1805) published in manuscript, which unleashed the fury of the irritable Juan Pablo Forner, since then a persistent black beast. from Iriarte. In his Comparison of the Eclogues awarded by the Royal Academy of Language, unpublished until the 20th century, Forner describes Iriarte's poem as “bad rhymed prose”.

At that time, Iriarte drew up, at the request of Floridablanca, his Plan for an Academy of Sciences and Good Letters, where he complained that writers had to neglect their task in pursuit of economic support, advocating their professionalization. The Plan was tripped up by his enemies and was not put into practice.

But the work to which Iriarte owes his fame is Literary Fables, published in 1782. The volume consisted of sixty-seven apologists, later increased in posthumous editions. Although he boasted of having written them in a month as entertainment, Iriarte put great creative effort into the Fables, aware that he was renewing the old fabulistic genre by using animal apologists with an educational intention related to literature. Overall, the topics he deals with are: general norms of literary creation; more frequent defects, of strictly literary origin (bad translators, authors lacking in originality) or not (plagiarists, vain); negative traits of the literary world (envy, lack of solidarity, inversion of values); ignorance of the vulgar and of criticism; advice of various kinds. The Fables display an eclectic poetics, and constitute perhaps the widest metrical sampler prior to literary Modernism.

The numerous translations, imitations, commentaries and reissues attest to his extraordinary success, and it is also due to him that his figure was reduced to his fabulist facet. García de la Huerta, Samaniego, Ramón de la Cruz, Meléndez Valdés, Forner soon felt alluded to... This was the first to attack; he did it with El asno erudito (1782), presented as a posthumous fable by an anonymous poet, whose publication was at the expense of a certain D. Pablo Segarra (Middle name and second surname of Forner). Behind the stupid affectation of the donkey, the person of Iriarte shone through, whom García de la Huerta also attacked in El loco de Chinchilla.

Iriarte swiftly responded to El asno erudito with a "parenetic-critical epistle or pathetic exhortation", which appeared addressed by D. Eleuterio Geta to the author of the Fables, with the title Official teachers usually have for such cases (1782), where The canary did not resist including the laudatory letter from Metastasio regarding La música.

Samaniego also intervened in this literary brawl.

In the third book of his Moral Character Fables (1781) he had praised Iriarte: "In my verses, Iriarte, / I no longer want more art / than to put yours as a model." When Iriarte published his, he inserted an "Editor's Warning" in which, positioning himself against the authors of "merely moral fables", he affirmed that his work was "the first collection of entirely original fables" published in Spanish. The offended Samaniego published, without the name of the author or other editorial data, Observations on the original literary fables of D. Tomás de Yriarte, where he discredited the Iriartian fables. The search for the printing press where said work had been published without licenses led Iriarte to come across a manuscript by Forner, now signed, entitled Los gramáticos: historia chinesca, which was waiting for a printing license. The writing was a coded invective against the cultural despotism of the Iriartes, especially against the late Don Juan. The influence of the Iriarte finally prevented its printing.

Tomás de Iriarte continued with his writing, punished by frequent attacks of gout. The commotion caused by Masson de Morvilliers' question in the Encyclopédie méthodique, “Mais que doit-on à l'Espagne?”, provoked the angry response of Forner (Apologetic Prayer for Spain and its literary merit, 1786), although in On this occasion, Iriarte preferred not to get bogged down in a new controversy in which Samaniego would intervene. Thus, he saw that the time had come to compile his writings in the six volumes of the Collection of his works (1787), whose second edition would be expanded into two more after his death (1805). The publication of the seventeen volumes of Theatro hispañol, an arbitrary selection of comedies aureas made by García de la Huerta, reactivated Iriarte's dedication to the theater, who defended the rules of art, credibility, the reasonable outline of characters, units and a neat and traditional language (not traditional). The result of these ideas is his comedy in octosyllables El señorito pampered (in Collection of Works, 1787), represented on September 9, 1788, with great success and good critical reception (Moratín Jr. considered it "the first original comedy" in theaters from Spain). Related to it is La señorita malcriada, published in 1788 (it could no longer be included in the first edition of the Collection of Works, although it would be included in the 1805 edition) and performed on January 3, 1791.

In 1790 he lived long periods in Sanlúcar de Barrameda, seeking relief from his illness and away from writers' fights. From then is the comedy El don de gentes and the comic toy Where the hare jumps least thought of, both titles represented in the halls of the Countess of Benavente and printed in the Collection of Works of 1805. Also in Sanlúcar he wrote the piece in a act The bookstore. On February 26, 1791, he premiered Guzmán el Bueno in Madrid, a work with which he introduces the melologist to Spain, in imitation of Rousseau's Pygmalion; That same year Samaniego would burlesquely imitate him with Parodia de Guzmán el Bueno, which he withdrew from the printer when Iriarte died.

A good part of the last year of his life was spent suffering from gout. A few hours before he died, according to the testimony of Don Bernardo, he dictated a sonnet summarizing his bitterness as a man of letters, to whose sacrifices society responds with disdain, as stated in the first quatrain: "Licking recognizes the benefit / the most fierce to the man who flatters him.

/ I, a writer, keep awake for those who pay / or late, or poorly, or never for the good service”.