Ventura Caro and Fontes


Caro and Fontes, Ventura. Valencia, 14.VII.1731 – 19.V.1808. Army Captain General.

Son of José Caro y Roca, first Marquis of La Romana, and Patricia Fontes. He entered the army on June 20, 1750, as a cadet in the Royal Walloon Guards regiment, and was subsequently promoted to lieutenant of riflemen, on March 21, 1752, and to 2nd lieutenant, on April 7, 1760. He took Part with that job in the Portuguese campaign of 1762. Later he was promoted to 1st lieutenant, on May 14, 1767.

He attended as a volunteer, under the orders of the Count of O'Reilly, the expedition and landing of Algiers, on July 8, 1775, where his older brother, the second Marquis of La Romana, was killed. In that same year he was assigned, on November 2, as a colonel attached to the regiment of dragoons of Pavia.

In 1776, he took part in the Pedro de Cevallos expedition to the Río de la Plata, serving as second commander of the dragoon corps, and distinguished himself in the capture of the island of Santa Catalina, on February 22, 1777, from where he passed to Montevideo, to organize a cavalry corps there, with which he participated in the surrender of the Colonia de Sacramento, the following June 4. On his return to Spain he was appointed colonel of the Almansa dragoon regiment (July 29, 1778). During the war against England, he embarked in Alicante with three dismounted squadrons of his regiment, and joined the Marquis de Crillon, in Menorca, distinguishing himself in the siege and capture of the castle of San Felipe, where he commanded the left of the parallel. Due to his conduct, he was promoted to cavalry brigadier on February 22, 1782, and appointed governor of the island.

In that same year, he marched to the siege of Gibraltar, where he commanded the column of Dismounted Grenadiers, from May 27, 1782, to February 2, 1783. He was promoted to field marshal in the promotion of January 1, 1783.

He participated as a volunteer in the expedition and bombardment of the Plaza de Algiers, under the orders of Antonio Barceló, from August 1 to 10, 1783.

On August 21, 1784, he was appointed a member of the boundary commission between Spain and France, and two years later, on April 26, 1786, he was appointed inspector general of the infantry and a member of the Supreme War Council, post which he held until his promotion to lieutenant general on January 14, 1789, also receiving the appointment as captain general of the island of Cuba, a destination that he did not occupy.

On February 10, 1789, he was granted a license to marry his niece María Anunciación Caro y Ortiz, sixteen years old and the only daughter of his late brother Carlos.

Carlos IV, after his accession to the throne, appointed him interim commander-in-chief of Galicia, on December 10, 1790; he was later named captain general of that kingdom on January 2, 1792.

Faced with the alarming situation created by the French Revolution and the deterioration of relations between the two countries, he was entrusted, on January 10, 1793, with the general captaincy of Guipúzcoa and command of the army of the Western Pyrenees.

According to the campaign plan, approved by the Supreme War Council, the mission of his army, called "of Guipúzcoa and Navarra", consisted of staying on the defensive, while the Roussillon army, commanded by Ricardos, would take the offensive. , seizing Perpignan.

Once war was declared, he quickly crossed the Bidasoa, seized Hendaye (April 23, 1793), then took the camp of Sara (April 30) and defeated the French at Château-Pignon on the following June 6. Continuing with the operations plan, it withdrew on the Bidasoa, where it repelled the continuous French attacks, on June 22 and July 13 and 14, on the important position of Biriatu. The following month the enemies were repulsed again, at that same point and at the Croix des Bouquets (August 29), where they suffered heavy losses. On September 7 they were defeated when attacking the posts of Urdax and Zugarramurdi, Caro remaining firmly until the end of the campaign in the line of defense of Bidasoa.

At the beginning of 1794, having lost some of the positions on the right bank of that river, Caro carried out, on February 5, 1794, a general sortie against the French commanded by General Muller, and they recaptured the Croix des Bouquets.

Called to Madrid, to arrange the plan of operations for that year, he unsuccessfully requested reinforcements for his army, a request that was not met; it was only confirmed to him that he remained on the defensive against the French.

Returned to his command, he had to face the attacks of a heavily reinforced French army, but he managed to repulse it in its attacks on the position of La Rhune, on March 26, 1794. The following month, he made a general attack, on March 25. April, from the Baztán Valley and Roncesvalles, burning more than four hundred huts and houses in Arnegui and Ondarrola, in retaliation for the Valcarlos fire.

In recognition of his performance, he was awarded the Grand Cross of Carlos III on April 4, 1794.

At the beginning of June, Muller, commander-in-chief of the army of the Pyrenees, attacked the positions of the Spanish army in Berderitz, the ports of Izpegui and Maya, as well as in Roncesvalles, but was repulsed between June 3 and 6. For his part, Caro decided to carry out a new general sortie, on the 23rd of that same month, in order to punish the French; but due to the lack of resources, they had to withdraw to their starting positions.

At the beginning of July he marched to Madrid, and before the refusal of the Council to reinforce his army, he presented his resignation, which was accepted, according to a report, on July 22, the Gaceta de Madrid, he was replaced in command by Lieutenant General Count of Colomera.

He remained retired until July 12, 1798, when the new Secretary of State, Francisco de Saavedra, after the retirement of Manuel Godoy, appointed him minister in the Court of Portugal, a position that he did not accept. He was then named captain general of Valencia on September 29, 1801, and was promoted to captain general of the army on December 28, 1802. He ceased his government and was succeeded by lieutenant general Domingo Izquierdo. He continued to reside in Valencia until his death on May 19, 1808.